A Clockwork Orange
Anthony Burgess


"A Clockwork Orange" by Anthony Burgess is a profound and often disturbing novel that explores the themes of freedom of choice, the ethics of state control and human nature. The story follows Alex, a juvenile delinquent in a dystopian future who is the leader of a violent youth gang and has a fondness for classical music. In the course of the story, Alex is arrested and subjected to a brutal brainwashing experiment designed to suppress his criminal tendencies.
Summary
Part 1: Alex's world
Alex, a 15-year-old teenager, leads a gang in a dystopian metropolis in the near future. His friends ("Droogs") and fellow gang members are Dim, a slow-witted bruiser who is the backbone of the gang, Georgie, an ambitious second-in-command, and Pete, who usually plays along when the Droogs indulge in their penchant for "ultra-violence" (random, violent mayhem). Alex, who is characterized as a sociopath and hardened juvenile delinquent, is intelligent, quick-witted and loves classical music; he particularly enjoys listening to Beethoven.
The Droogs are sitting in their favorite bar, the Korova Milk Bar, drinking "Milk-Plus" (milk with the customer's favorite drug) in preparation for a night of ultra-violence. They mug a scholar walking home from the public library, rob a store leaving the owner and his wife bloodied and unconscious, beat up a beggar and then brawl with a rival gang. On a joyride through the countryside in a stolen car, they break into a remote cottage and terrorize the young couple living there by beating up the man and raping his wife. In a metafictional allusion, the husband is a writer working on a manuscript entitled "A Clockwork Orange", and Alex contemptuously reads out a paragraph containing the main theme of the novel before shredding the manuscript. At Korova, Alex beats Dim for his rude reaction to a woman singing at an opera passage, and the tensions within the gang become clear. At home in his parents' apartment, Alex plays classical music at top volume, which he says gives him orgasmic bliss before falling asleep.
Alex feigns illness to his parents so that he doesn't have to go to school the next day. After an unexpected visit from P.R. Deltoid, his "post-corrective adviser", Alex visits a record store where he meets two pre-teen girls. He invites them to his apartment, where he drugs and rapes them. That night, after a nap, Alex finds his Droogs in a mutinous mood downstairs in the trashed and graffitied lobby. Georgie disputes Alex's leadership of the gang and demands that they focus their raids on higher-value targets. Alex suppresses the rebellion by slashing Dim's hand and clashing with Georgie. He then appeases the gang by agreeing to Georgie's plan to rob the home of a wealthy elderly woman. Alex breaks in and knocks the woman unconscious. However, when he hears sirens and opens the door to escape, Dim strikes him in revenge for the previous fight. The gang leaves Alex on the front steps so that he can be arrested by the police; during the arrest, he learns that the woman has died from her injuries.
Part 2: The Ludovico Technique
Alex is convicted of murder and has to serve a 14-year sentence. One day his parents visit him and tell him that Georgie was killed in a botched robbery. After two years in prison, he has been given a job in one of the prison chapels, where he accompanies the Sunday services with music from the stereo system. The chaplain thinks Alex's Bible study is an exercise in faith; in reality, Alex only reads the Bible because of the violent or sexual passages. After his cellmates accuse him of beating a troublesome cellmate to death, he is chosen to undergo an experimental behavior-altering treatment called the Ludovico Technique in exchange for having the rest of his sentence remitted. This method involves aversion therapy where Alex is administered drugs that induce nausea as he watches graphically violent films, leading to a conditioned response that makes him severely sick at the thought of violence. An unintended consequence is that the soundtrack to one of the films, Beethoven's Ninth Symphony, means that Alex can no longer enjoy his beloved classical music as he used to.
The effectiveness of the technique is demonstrated to a group of honored guests who watch Alex collapse in front of a man who slaps him and humiliates himself in front of a scantily clad young woman. Although the prison chaplain accuses the state of taking away Alex's free will, the government officials present are satisfied with the outcome and Alex is released from prison.
Part 3: After prison
Alex returns to his parents' apartment, but finds that they are renting his room to a subtenant. Homeless, he roams the streets and visits a public library in search of a painless method to commit suicide. The old scholar whom Alex attacked in Part 1 finds him and beats him up with the help of several friends. Two policemen come to Alex's aid, but they turn out to be Dim and Billyboy, a former rival gang leader. They take Alex out of town, abuse him and abandon him there. Alex collapses at the door of a remote cabin and realizes too late that this is the cabin he and his Droogs broke into in Part 1.
The writer F. Alexander still lives here, but his wife has since died from the injuries he believes she sustained during the rape. He doesn't recognize Alex, but gives him shelter and questions him about the conditioning he was subjected to. Alexander and his colleagues, who are all highly critical of the government, plan to use Alex as a symbol of the brutality of the state in order to prevent the incumbent government from being re-elected. Alex inadvertently reveals that he was the ringleader of the home invasion; he is taken out of the house and locked in an upstairs bedroom while classical music plays incessantly from the loudspeakers. He tries to end his life by leaping from a window.
Alex wakes up in a hospital, where government officials court him, aiming to mitigate the negative publicity generated by his suicide attempt. He is told that F. Alexander has been "put away" for his and Alex's protection. Alex is offered a well-paid job if he agrees to side with the government after his release. A series of tests reveal that his old violent impulses have returned, suggesting that the hospital doctors have reversed the effects of his conditioning. As the photographers snap pictures, Alex dreams of orgiastic acts of violence.
In the final chapter, Alex, now 18 and working for the nation's music archives, realizes that he takes less and less pleasure in senseless acts of violence and contemplates giving up crime to become a productive member of society. But his new gang (Len, Rick and Bully) are still taking part in nightly rampages. After a chance encounter with Pete, who has reformed and married, Alex contemplates starting a family of his own, while pondering the thought that his children may be just as destructive as he is, if not more so.
