Adventures of Huckleberry Finn
Mark Twain


"Adventures of Huckleberry Finn" by Mark Twain is a sequel to "The Adventures of Tom Sawyer" and is often regarded as one of the greatest works of American literature. The novel tells the story of Huck Finn, who breaks away from his alcoholic father and travels down the Mississippi River on a raft with the runaway slave Jim. The book is famous for its vivid portrayal of the antebellum South, its sharp social criticism and its humorous exploration of freedom and friendship.
Summary
In the 1830s and 1840s, in St. Petersburg, Missouri, on the Mississippi River, Huckleberry "Huck" Finn has come into some money after his experiences with Tom Sawyer. He is taken into the strict care of the widow Douglas and her sister, Miss Watson, who try to educate him and teach him bourgeois manners. However, Huck is drawn to adventurous forays with his friend Tom Sawyer. His violent and alcoholic father, "Pap", reappears in town and wants to get his hands on Huck's fortune. When he fails to do so, he kidnaps Huck and locks him up in a remote cabin in the woods.
To escape his father, Huck cleverly stages his own death and embarks on a journey downriver. He ends up on Jackson's Island and meets Jim, Miss Watson's runaway slave. Jim had escaped after learning that his owner wanted to sell him. Huck decides to accompany Jim and make his way with him to Cairo, Illinois, a free state. After a violent flood, they get hold of a wooden raft and come across a floating house in which Jim finds a dead person with a gunshot wound. He prevents Huck from seeing the body. In the town, Huck learns that a reward has been offered for Jim, as he has been falsely accused of murdering Huck. The two continue their escape on the raft.
Huck and Jim discover a stranded steamer named Walter Scott, on which they overhear two criminals talking about killing an accomplice. After Huck and Jim realize that their own raft has drifted away, they escape in the thieves' boat before they are noticed. They come across their own raft again, sink the thieves' boat and keep the loot. However, Huck convinces a watchman to rescue the thieves who are stranded, as his conscience is bothering him. After they get lost in the fog and find each other again, Huck initially lets Jim believe that the experiences are just a dream. Jim is disappointed when Huck admits the truth, and Huck apologizes, surprised by the depth of Jim's feelings.
Huck struggles with whether to support Jim as an escaped slave because he has learned that this is sinful. When they are confronted by two men looking for runaway slaves, he deceives them and they move on. Jim and Huck realize that they have missed Cairo, and since they cannot return upriver, they head downriver. A passing steamer rams the raft and separates them again.
Huck lands on the shore and meets the Grangerford family, who have been involved in a blood feud with the Shepherdsons for three decades, although no one knows the origin of the conflict. When a Grangerford daughter elopes with a Shepherdson boy, the feud escalates and all the male Grangerfords are killed in a Shepherdson ambush. Huck escapes the chaos and reunites with Jim, who has repaired the raft.
Further downriver, Jim and Huck encounter two tricksters pretending to be a king and a duke. They persuade Huck and Jim to take part in their scam. In one town they put on a bad and overpriced show, and after three nights they escape before the angry townspeople can take revenge. In the next settlement, they pose as the brothers of the late Peter Wilks in order to appropriate his inheritance. Huck wants to save the money for Wilks' homeless nieces, and chaos breaks out when two men turn up posing as Wilks' real brothers. In the ensuing confusion, Huck is caught by the con men but escapes and discovers that the con men have sold Jim to the Phelps family plantation. Huck vows to rescue Jim, although he fears that this could mean his damnation.
The Phelps think Huck is their expected nephew Tom, and Huck plays along with the game. In fact, their nephew is Tom Sawyer, and when he turns up, he agrees to Huck's hoax and concocts an elaborate plan to free Jim. During the escape, Tom is injured and Jim, instead of escaping, is arrested for looking after Tom. Tom's Aunt Polly arrives and reveals the boys' true identities, and it turns out that Jim is already free through the will of the late Miss Watson. Tom confesses that he knew about Jim's freedom but still wanted to stage a "rescue" in this way. Jim reveals that Huck's father was the dead man in the floating house, so Huck can now safely return to St. Petersburg. However, Huck declares that he wants to move west to Indian Territory instead, to escape adoption by the Phelps family.
