Alice's Adventures in Wonderland
Lewis Carroll


"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland" by Lewis Carroll is an outstanding work of children's and young adult literature that also fascinates and challenges adults. The novel tells of the fantastic adventures of the young girl Alice, who follows a hunted white rabbit down the rabbit hole and ends up in a wondrous world full of bizarre characters and absurd events. The work is characterized by its play with logic, its linguistic experiments and its profound philosophical and literary allusions.
Summary
A young girl named Alice sits bored on a riverbank, where she suddenly sees a white rabbit with a pocket watch and a vest, complaining that he is late. The surprised Alice follows him down a rabbit hole, which sends her tumbling into the depths, where she lands safely. In a room with a table, she finds a key to a tiny door, behind which is a beautiful garden. As she ponders how to get through the door, she discovers a bottle labeled "Drink me". Alice hesitantly drinks some of the bottle's contents, and to her astonishment, she shrinks small enough to walk through the door. However, she had left the key on the table and can't reach it.
Alice then discovers a cake and eats it, whereupon she grows to enormous size. When the unhappy Alice bursts into tears, the white rabbit flees in panic, dropping a fan and a pair of gloves in the process. Alice uses the fan for herself, whereupon she shrinks again and swims in a pool of her own tears. In this pool, Alice encounters a variety of animals and birds who gather on a bench and hold a "Caucus Race" to dry themselves. After the race is over, Alice accidentally scares the animals away by talking about her cat.
The white rabbit appears looking for the gloves and the fan. He thinks Alice is his maid and orders her to go into his house and fetch them. Alice finds another bottle and drinks from it, whereupon it grows so much that it gets stuck in the house. The White Rabbit and his neighbors try to get her out in various ways and end up throwing pebbles that turn into little cakes. Alice eats one and shrinks in the process so that she can escape into the forest. There she meets a caterpillar sitting on a mushroom and smoking a water pipe. As the caterpillar quizzes her, Alice confesses her current identity crisis, which is exacerbated by her inability to remember a poem. Before she crawls away, the caterpillar explains to her that a bite from one side of the mushroom will make her bigger, while a bite from the other side will make her smaller. In a phase of trial and error, Alice sticks her neck out from between the treetops and frightens a pigeon, which she mistakes for a snake.
After shrinking to a reasonable size, Alice arrives at the home of a Duchess who has a constantly grinning cat. The Duchess's baby, which she hands to Alice, turns into a piglet, which Alice releases into the forest. The Cheshire Cat appears to Alice and shows her the way to the Mad Hatter and the March Hare before disappearing, leaving her grin behind. Alice finds the Hatter, the March Hare and a sleepy dormouse in the middle of an absurd tea party. The Hatter explains that it is always 6pm (tea time) and claims that time stands still as punishment for the Hatter trying to "kill" her. A strange conversation ensues at the table and a strange mystery is raised. Finally, Alice impatiently decides to leave the table, calling it the stupidest tea party she has ever attended.
Alice notices a door on one of the trees, goes through it and finds herself in the room where she began her journey. She manages to take the key and use it to open the door to the garden, which turns out to be the croquet court of the Queen of Hearts, whose guard consists of living playing cards. Alice takes part in a croquet game in which hedgehogs are used as balls, flamingos as mallets and soldiers as goals. The Queen proves to be irascible and constantly orders beheadings. When the Cheshire Cat appears only as a head, the Queen orders its decapitation, only to learn that this is impossible. As the cat belongs to the Duchess, Alice asks the Queen to release the duchess from prison in order to settle the matter. When the Duchess reflects that she finds morality in everything that surrounds her, the Queen dismisses her under threat of execution.
Alice then meets a Gryphon and a Mock Turtle dancing to the Lobster Quadrille. The Mock Turtle sings to them while the Gryphon drags Alice to an upcoming trial where the Knave of Hearts is accused of stealing the Queen's cakes. The trial is ridiculously presided over by the King of Hearts, and the jury is made up of various animals Alice has met before. Alice gradually grows taller and more self-confident and allows herself more and more frequent remarks about the irrationality of the trial. The Queen eventually orders Alice to be beheaded, but Alice scoffs that the Queen's guard is just a pack of cards. Although Alice resists for a while, she is soon overrun by the card guards. Alice's sister wakes her up from a dream and brushes a few leaves off her face. Alice then leaves her sister on the bench to make up her own mind about the strange events.
