Anna Karenina
Leo Tolstoy


"Anna Karenina" by Leo Tolstoy is a vast and profound novel about human nature, love, society and the consequences of our choices. The work, which is often considered the pinnacle of the realist novel, depicts the life and tragic love story of Anna Karenina, a married aristocrat who enters into a disastrous affair with the charming Count Vronsky and is thus caught in a conflict between love, duty and social acceptance.
Summary
At the beginning of the novel, we are introduced to Prince Stepan Arkadyevich Oblonsky ("Stiva"), a high-ranking civil servant who has been unfaithful to his wife, Darya Alexandrovna ("Dolly"). Stiva, driven by an uncontrollable infatuation, sends his married sister, Anna Karenina, from St. Petersburg to convince Dolly not to abandon him.
On arrival in Moscow, a railroad worker falls under the train and loses his life - a harbinger of Anna's fate. Meanwhile, Stiva's childhood friend Konstantin Dmitrievich Lyovin arrives in Moscow to propose to Dolly's younger sister Katerina Alexandrovna Shherbatskaya ("Kitty"). The respectable landowner of aristocratic descent lives on a large estate, which he manages. Kitty turns him down, however, as she is expecting a proposal from Count Aleksey Kirillovich Vronsky, an officer. Although he likes Kitty very much, Vronsky has no desire to ever marry - until he meets Anna, who has been traveling with his mother, on the train platform where he picks up his mother. Later, at a ball, he falls in love with her.
Anna, shocked by her own reaction to Vronsky, returns to St. Petersburg immediately. Vronsky follows her on the same train. Lyovin gives up hope of marriage and returns to his country estate. Anna remains in St. Petersburg with her husband Alexei Alexandrovich Karenin, a high-ranking government official, and their son Seryozha.
Karenin berates his wife Anna for spending too much time with Vronsky. Eventually she gives in to Vronsky's advances and becomes pregnant by him. When Vronsky then falls off his racehorse during a prestigious race, Anna is very concerned about his reputation; so much so that everyone realizes that something is wrong and she confesses her affair to her husband. When Kitty learns that Vronsky is in love with Anna, she travels with her parents to a health resort in Germany to recover from the shock.
Lyovin immerses himself in his agricultural work, which is closely linked to his spiritual thoughts and reflections. Dolly meets up with Lyovin and tries to rekindle his feelings for Kitty. Dolly does not seem to succeed, but a chance glance at Kitty makes Lyovin realize that he still loves her. In Petersburg, Karenin drives Anna to despair by refusing to divorce her and threatens to separate her from her son Seryozha forever if she runs away or does not behave herself.
Karenin initiates divorce proceedings. Anna's brother Stiva thinks this is a bad idea and persuades Karenin to talk to Dolly first. Here, too, Dolly seems to be unsuccessful at first, but Karenin changes his mind when he learns by telegram that Anna's life is in danger after the birth of her child. On her deathbed, he forgives Vronsky, who tries to commit suicide out of remorse. Anna survives the maternal fever, partially anaesthetized by morphine. Stiva now sees himself in a position to urge Karenin to divorce in Anna's own interests. Vronsky initially opts for an army post in Tashkent, but changes his mind after a conversation with Anna. They leave for Europe together, without Anna's divorce from her husband having been finalized. Stiva organizes a meeting between Lyovin and Kitty, which leads to a reconciliation and a subsequent engagement.
Lyovin and Kitty get married. A few months later, Lyovin learns that his brother Nikolai is dying. The couple travel to see him and Kitty cares for him until his death. In the meantime, she also finds out that she is pregnant. In Europe, Vronsky and Anna do their best to find friends who accept them and activities that entertain them, but eventually they return to Russia. Karenin, meanwhile, is comforted and influenced by the cunning Countess Lydia Ivanovna. The countess is a follower of religious and mystical ideas popular among the upper classes. She persuades Karenin to keep Seryozha away from Anna. Despite everything, Anna manages to visit Seryozha unexpectedly on his birthday, much to the annoyance of Karenin, who had told his son that his mother had died. Soon afterwards, she goes to the country with Vronsky.
Dolly visits Anna. At Vronsky's request, she urges Anna to press ahead with Karenin's divorce. Here, too, Dolly seems to achieve nothing, but when Vronsky is absent for days because of the provincial elections, Anna realizes, out of a mixture of boredom and mistrust, that she must marry Vronsky. So she writes to Karenin and travels to Moscow with Vronsky.
The Lyovins are in Moscow, where Kitty gives birth to a son. Stiva visits Karenin to get his support for a new job and asks Karenin to agree to the divorce. However, Karenin is now persuaded by a "clairvoyant" - whom he met through Lydia Ivanovna - who apparently advises him to say "no". Anna and Vronsky become increasingly bitter towards each other. They plan to return to the country, but Anna leaves early out of jealousy and throws herself in front of an approaching freight train in revenge.
After Anna's death, Stiva gets the lucrative job he has been wishing for. Vronsky travels to Serbia with a troop of volunteers to support the Serbian uprising against the Turks - with no prospect of returning. Thanks to the joys and fears of fatherhood and after a conversation with an old farmer, Lyovin finally converts and no longer doubts his faith.
