Around the World in Eighty Days
Jules Verne


"Around the World in Eighty Days" by Jules Verne is a timeless adventure book that takes the reader on a captivating journey around the world. The book tells the story of the eccentric English gentleman Phileas Fogg, who makes a bet and attempts to circumnavigate the world in just 80 days. The novel is a prototype of the adventure and travel literature genre and combines scientific knowledge, technological curiosity and a captivating plot with a detailed portrayal of different cultures and geographical features.
Summary
Phileas Fogg is a rich gentleman who leads a lonely life in London. Despite his wealth, his life is modest and his habits are regulated with surgical precision. Very little is known about his life except that he is a member of the Reform Club, where he spends most of the day. After dismissing his valet James Forster for bringing him shaving lotion at a slightly lower temperature than desired, Fogg hired the Frenchman Jean Passepartout as a replacement.
On October 2, 1872, Phileas Fogg visits the Reform Club, as he does every day. As he looks through the newspaper, he learns that, following the opening of a new section of railroad in India, it is now possible to circumnavigate the world in eighty days on a specific route.
A heated discussion breaks out over this article. Phileas Fogg bets his colleagues at the Reform Club 20,000 pounds, half of his fortune, that he will succeed in circumnavigating the world in eighty days. He sets off immediately, taking his new valet Jean Passepartout, a clever young Frenchman, with him. He leaves London on October 2 at 8.45 p.m. and must therefore be back at his club by the same time, eighty days later, on December 21, 1872 at 8.45 p.m. local time.
Phileas Fogg is a time fanatic who likes to be exact and precise. For him, the unforeseen does not exist. But the journey will be paved with obstacles and setbacks.
Fogg's bet and his departure make the headlines. The police wonder whether Phileas Fogg is the famous thief who has just robbed the Bank of England and is allegedly trying to escape. Detective Fix sets off in search of him and pursues him incessantly through all the countries he passes through.
Phileas Fogg and Passepartout set off from London by train and then use various means of transportation, such as an elephant, once they arrive in India. On the way through the Indian forests, they rescue Mrs. Aouda, a young widow who, according to the Sati custom, was to be burned alive in a ceremony dedicated to the goddess Kali.
Fogg misses the steamer in Hong Kong, but Passepartout goes on board. They finally meet a few days later in Japan, in Yokohama, in a circus where Passepartout has been hired as an acrobat.
When Phileas Fogg arrives in San Francisco, he finds himself in the middle of the election campaign and makes an enemy of Colonel Stamp Proctor. He takes the train and meets the colonel, with whom he is about to fight a duel, when the train is attacked by the Sioux. Passepartout manages to stop the train after the engine drivers have been put out of action by the attackers, but is taken prisoner. However, Fogg manages to free him with the help of some other passengers. Unfortunately, the train has left the station in the meantime. Fogg, Passepartout, Fix and Mrs. Aouda enlist the services of a sailing sledge, which takes them at high speed across the icy expanses to Omaha. From there, the group travels by train to Chicago and on to New York, where, unfortunately, their ship to Liverpool has just left.
Under time pressure, Phileas Fogg "borrows" a steamer in order to arrive in northern England on time (as the captain did not want to take him to Liverpool, Fogg simply bought the crew). As the steamer has run out of coal, Fogg buys the ship and the sailors cut down all the wood to use as fuel. However, as soon as Fogg goes ashore in England, he is arrested by Fix and later released when he discovers his mistake, as the real thief has been arrested in the meantime. Having missed the train to London, Fogg commandeers a locomotive to take him there, but arrives five minutes late. Believing he has lost his bet, Phileas Fogg returns home and is now ruined.
When he and Mrs. Aouda confess their love the next day, Fogg sends his servant to the Reverend to arrange for his wedding to Mrs. Aouda to take place the next day. At the Reverend's, Passepartout realizes that they have saved 24 hours on their journey due to the many time differences, so they have arrived a day early and it is now December 21st. He runs to warn his master, who then rushes to the Reform Club and wins his bet by a few seconds.
