Brave New World
Aldous Huxley


"Brave New World" by Aldous Huxley is a groundbreaking dystopian novel that imagines a future in which society is manipulated by technological advances such as the control of reproduction, the conditioning of individuals from birth and the use of drugs to regulate mood. This world is focused on superficial happiness and the avoidance of discomfort, sacrificing personal freedom and deeper human emotions. Huxley's work is a critical examination of the effects of progress on human nature and human freedom.
Summary
The novel begins in the cosmopolitan city of London in the year 632 AF (After Ford) (2540 AD in the Gregorian calendar), where citizens are divided into certain classes (castes) based on intelligence and labor through artificial births and childhood indoctrination programs. The hatchery worker, Lenina Crowne, is popular and sexually desirable, but the same cannot be said for her colleague Bernard Marx, a psychologist. He is shorter than the average member of his high caste, which gives him an inferiority complex. Through his work, Bernard understands and disapproves of the methods used to keep the citizens peaceful. This includes the constant consumption of a calming, happiness-inducing drug called "soma". Bernard is so vocal and arrogant in his criticism that his boss considers exiling him to Iceland for his non-conformity. His sole friend, Helmholtz Watson, is a gifted writer who struggles to express his creativity in a society that avoids pain.
Bernard takes Lenina on a vacation outside the World State to a Savage Reservation in New Mexico, where the two observe indigenous peoples, diseases, the aging process, other languages and religious ways of life for the first time. Bernard and Lenina observe a brutal public ritual and then meet Linda, a woman originally from the World State who now lives on the reservation with her son John. She also visited the reservation many years ago during a vacation, but was separated from her group and left behind. In the meantime, she had become pregnant by another vacationer (it turns out that Bernard's boss, the director of Hatcheries and Conditioning, is the father of the child). She did not try to return to the World State because she was ashamed of her pregnancy. Although he has spent his entire life on the reservation, John has never been accepted by the villagers, and his and Linda's lives have been hard and unpleasant.
Linda has taught John to read, but from the only book she owns - a science manual - and another book John has found: the complete works of Shakespeare. Ostracized by the villagers, John can only express his feelings in the form of Shakespeare's plays and often quotes from "King Lear", "Othello", "The Tempest", "Romeo and Juliet" and "Hamlet". Linda now wants to return to London, and John also wants to see this "brave new world". Bernard sees an opportunity to thwart the director's banishment plans and is given permission to take Linda and John back. On their return to London, John meets the Headmaster and calls him his "father", a vulgarity that triggers a roar of laughter. The humiliated director resigns in shame before he can enforce Bernard's banishment.
As "custodian" of the "savage" John, who is now treated like a celebrity, Bernard is idolized by the highest members of society and enjoys the attention he once despised. However, Bernard's popularity quickly fades, and he grows envious of the genuine connection that John shares only with the literary-minded Helmholtz. Linda, who is considered ugly and friendless, spends all her time consuming soma, while John refuses to attend the social events organized by Bernard, as he is appalled by what he perceives as an empty society. Lenina and John are physically attracted to each other, but John's view of courtship and romance, based on Shakespeare's writings, is completely at odds with Lenina's permissive attitude to sex. She tries to seduce him, but he attacks her before suddenly learning that his mother is dying. He rushes to Linda's bedside, causing a scandal, as this is not the "right" way to deal with death.
Some children who come to the ward for "death conditioning" show dis-respect to John, and he physically assaults one of them. He then tries to disrupt the distribution of soma to a lower caste group by telling them that he is freeing them. Helmholtz and Bernard intervene to halt the riot, which the police quickly suppress by dispersing soma vapor among the crowd.
Bernard, Helmholtz and John are brought before Mustapha Mond, the "Resident World Controller for Western Europe", who informs Bernard and Helmholtz that they are to be banished to islands for antisocial activities. Bernard asks for a second chance, but Helmholtz welcomes the opportunity to be a true individual and chooses the Falkland Islands as his destination, believing that the bad weather will inspire him to write. Mond explains to Helmholtz that exile is actually a reward. The most interesting people in the world live on the islands, individuals who do not fit into the social model of the world state. Mond describes to John the events that have led to today's society and his arguments for a caste system and social control. John rejects Mond's arguments, and Mond summarizes John's views by claiming that John is claiming the right to be unhappy. John inquires if he can also go to the islands, but Mond declines, expressing a desire to observe what unfolds in John's life next.
John is weary of his new life and moves into an abandoned lighthouse on a hill near a village where he plans to live a solitary, ascetic life to purify himself from civilization by practicing self-flagellation. This attracts reporters and eventually hundreds of astonished onlookers hoping to witness his bizarre behavior.
For a time, it seems John will be left alone after the public's attention is diverted to other distractions, but a documentary filmmaker has secretly filmed John's self-flagellation from a distance, and when the documentary is released, it causes an international stir. Helicopters with more journalists arrive. Crowds of people flock to John's place of refuge and demand that he perform his flogging ritual for them. A young woman, presumably Lenina, emerges from a helicopter. At the sight of a woman he both adores and loathes, John angrily lashes out at her and then turns the whip on himself, arousing the crowd, whose wild behavior turns into a soma orgy. The next morning, John wakes up on the floor and is plagued by remorse over his participation in the night's events.
That evening, a swarm of helicopters appears on the horizon, as the story of the night's orgy has been all over the papers. The first onlookers and reporters to arrive discover that John has hanged himself.
