Death in Venice
Thomas Mann


"Death in Venice" by Thomas Mann is a moving and provocative novella about longing, artistic inspiration and the decay of a soul. It tells the story of Gustav von Aschenbach, an ageing German writer who goes on a trip to Venice and develops an inexplicable fascination for a Polish boy named Tadzio. This obsession leads to an inner conflict between rational discipline and irrational desire, which takes its course in the picturesque setting of Venice.
Summary
Gustav von Aschenbach is the main character of the work, a famous writer in his early fifties who has been ennobled for his artistic talent and thus bears the aristocratic title "von". His life is characterized by discipline and asceticism, and he has been a widower since the early death of his wife.
During a walk through a cemetery, Aschenbach's attention is caught by a coarse, red-haired stranger whose challenging gaze both embarrasses and fascinates him. This encounter triggers a vision of a wild, exotic swampland, rich with hidden dangers. Driven by this experience, he decides to take a vacation.
His first attempt to vacation in Pula on the then Austro-Hungarian coast (now Croatia) fails, and he feels drawn to Venice. There he moves into a suite at the Grand Hôtel des Bains on the island of Lido. While traveling there by boat, he witnesses an older man who is trying to look young by wearing a wig, false teeth and make-up. This sight repels Aschenbach.
Later in Venice, he has an unsettling encounter with an unlicensed gondolier, another red-haired stranger with a haunted face who emphasizes his skills as a rower, even as Aschenbach demands to return to the quay.
After checking into the hotel, Aschenbach witnesses a Polish noble family to which a boy of about 14 in a sailor suit belongs. This boy radiates an extraordinary beauty that reminds Aschenbach of a Greek sculpture, while the boy's older sisters are dressed so conservatively that they remind him of nuns.
After observing the boy and his family on the beach, Aschenbach accidentally learns the boy's name, Tadzio. At first, he interprets his fascination with the boy as an uplifting artistic interest.
The oppressive weather in Venice affects Aschenbach's well-being and he decides to travel to a cooler place. On the day of his planned departure, however, he sees Tadzio again and is overcome by an overwhelming feeling of regret. After realizing at the station that his suitcase is missing, he uses this as an excuse to stay in Venice. Inwardly rejoicing, he returns to the hotel and rejects the idea of leaving.
In the days and weeks that follow, Aschenbach's interest in Tadzio turns into a veritable obsession. He watches the boy constantly and even follows him around the city. One evening, Tadzio smiles at him and Aschenbach compares the smile to that of Narcissus looking at his own reflection. Later, in an empty garden, he secretly confesses his love for the boy.
During an excursion into the city, Aschenbach notices inconspicuous announcements from the health department warning of an unspecified epidemic and recommending the consumption of mussels. He also notices an unusually strong smell, which he later identifies as disinfectant. The authorities deny any serious threat of an epidemic, so the tourists continue to walk the streets of Venice unsuspectingly.
Aschenbach initially ignores the impending danger in Venice, seeing in the city's disease a parallel to his own hidden and pernicious passion for the boy. During this time, a third red-haired and shady man enters Aschenbach's life, who is part of a group of street singers. Aschenbach listens to their songs with fascination, although he would have despised such music in the past, and keeps glancing at Tadzio. When the boy returns his gaze, Aschenbach briefly senses that the attraction may be mutual.
Later, Aschenbach decides to get to the bottom of the truth about the mysterious health warnings in the city. A British tour operator finally reluctantly admits that a severe cholera epidemic is raging in Venice. Although Aschenbach considers warning Tadzio's mother, he hesitates as he does not want to lose the boy.
During a night of dreamlike, orgiastic images, Aschenbach realizes that his feelings for Tadzio are of a sexual nature. Afterwards, he observes the boy so obviously and follows him so persistently that the boy's parents apparently notice him and begin to warn Tadzio about the strange man. Despite the intensity of his feelings, Aschenbach's affection remains unspoken; he never touches or speaks to Tadzio, and although there are signs that the boy is aware of his admiration, their communication is limited to occasional, furtive glances.
Aschenbach is increasingly annoyed by his ageing appearance and takes steps to look younger. Almost every day he visits the hairdresser at the hotel, who persuades him to dye his hair and apply make-up. The result is frighteningly reminiscent of the old man on the ship who embarrassed him so much.
In his newly acquired "youth", Aschenbach follows Tadzio through stuffy Venice, but loses sight of him in the city's alleyways. Exhausted and thirsty, he buys a few overripe strawberries and eats them before settling down in a deserted square. He begins to reflect on the Platonic ideal of beauty as the ruins of his once proud dignity crumble around him.
A few days later, Aschenbach feels ill and weak in the hotel lobby and learns of the Polish family's imminent departure. He goes to his usual deckchair on the beach and watches as Tadzio, for once without supervision, gets into a fight with an older boy called Jasiu and is defeated. Furious, Tadzio leaves his companion and stands for a moment on Aschenbach's stretch of beach, gazing out to sea and then half-turns to face him. Aschenbach feels as if the boy is waving at him and tries to get up to follow him, but he sinks into his chair and dies of the cholera he contracted from the overripe strawberries. His body is found minutes later.
