Don Quixote
Miguel de Cervantes


"Don Quixote" by Miguel de Cervantes is an episodic novel that was published in two parts (1605 and 1615). The novel tells the story of Don Quixote, an impoverished country nobleman who loses his mind after reading numerous chivalric novels and decides to become a knight himself. Together with his faithful servant Sancho Panza, he travels through Spain and experiences numerous adventures that are often humorous and blur the boundaries between reality and fiction.
Cervantes is considered the most important author in Spanish literature. His work "Don Quixote" is not only regarded as the first great novel of modern times and the most famous Spanish book, but also - after the Bible - as the most translated and most influential book in world literature.
Summary
Part 1
The first foray
Alonso Quijano is a hidalgo aged almost 50 who lives with his niece and his housekeeper in La Mancha. He leads a modest life, but as an avid reader of chivalric novels, he is full of fantasies about knighthood. Eventually he goes mad and decides to become a knight-errant. To this end, he dons an old suit of armor, calls himself "Don Quixote", names his old workhorse "Rocinante" and appoints Aldonza Lorenzo (a slaughterhouse worker) as his lover, calling her Dulcinea del Toboso.
In search of adventure, Don Quixote arrives at an inn, which he mistakes for a castle. He refers to the prostitutes he meets there as "ladies" and demands that the innkeeper, whom he believes to be the lord of the castle, knight him. The innkeeper agrees. Quixote spends the night keeping watch at the inn's horse trough, which he believes to be a chapel. Later, he gets into a fight with muleteers who try to remove his armor from the horse trough so that they can water their mules. The innkeeper finally performs a mock ceremony and appoints Quixote a knight to get rid of him and sends him away.
Quixote meets a servant called Andres, who is tied to a tree and is being beaten up by his master because of a dispute over wages. Quixote orders the master to stop the beatings and release Andres, and makes the master swear to treat Andres fairly. But as soon as Quixote has left the place, the master resumes the beatings and even doubles them.
Later, Quixote meets merchants from Toledo. He asks them to confirm that Dulcinea del Toboso is the most beautiful woman in the world. One of the merchants demands to see a picture of her so that he can judge for himself. Angered by this, Quixote charges towards the merchants, but his horse stumbles and he falls to the ground. One of the merchants hits Quixote, who is lying on the ground and is left helpless on the side of the road until a neighboring farmer takes him home.
While Quixote lies unconscious in his bed, his niece, the housekeeper, the priest and the local barber burn most of his books of chivalry and other works. They seal the room in which the library was located and later explain to Quixote that a sorcerer is responsible.
The second foray
Don Quixote asks his neighbor, the poor farmhand Sancho Panza, to become his squire and promises him a small governorship. Sancho agrees and they sneak off at dawn. Their adventures together begin when Quixote attacks some windmills, which he believes to be wild giants. They then encounter two Benedictine monks and, nearby, a strange lady in a carriage. Thinking the monks are sorcerers holding the lady captive, Quixote knocks one of them off his horse and is then challenged by an armed Basque traveling with the company. The conflict ends when the lady gets out of the carriage and calls on her fellow travelers to surrender to Quixote.
After a friendly encounter with some goatherds and a less friendly one with riders on Galician ponies, Quixote and Sancho return to the "castle" (inn). A brawl breaks out there. Quixote tells Sancho that the castle is under a spell. They decide to leave, but Quixote follows the custom of the novel knights and leaves the inn without paying. Sancho is wrapped in a blanket and thrown through the air by mischievous guests before he finally manages to escape and follow Quixote.
After further adventures involving a corpse, a legendary helmet - at least in Quixote's imagination - and a group of galley slaves, they wander into the Sierra Morena. There they meet the dejected and mostly confused Cardenio, who tells them his story.
Inspired by Cardenio's way of life, Quixote decides to live like a hermit too. He dispatches Sancho with a letter for Dulcinea. However, Sancho meets the barkeeper and the priest from his home village instead. They hatch a plan to persuade Quixote to return home and recruit Dorothea, a woman they find in the forest. They give her the role of Princess Micomicona, a damsel in distress.
The plan works and Quixote returns to the inn with the group. Thanks to a lie that Sancho tells about the letter, Quixote is convinced that Dulcinea wants to see him. At the inn, several storylines finally come together and find their resolution.
Meanwhile, the sleepwalking Quixote struggles with some wineskins that he believes to be the giant who has stolen Princess Micomicona's kingdom. An officer of the Santa Hermandad, who arrives with a warrant for Quixote's arrest for freeing the galley slaves, is asked by the priest to show mercy, as Quixote is insane. The officer agrees and Quixote is locked in a cage, which he believes to be an enchantment.
On the way, Quixote has an erudite conversation with a canon from Toledo, whom he meets by chance. The canon expresses his contempt for the untrue chivalric books, which Quixote defends. During a break for a meal, Quixote is released from his "captivity". However, he promptly gets into an altercation with a shepherd herding goats and a band of pilgrims who defeat him before he is finally returned to his home.
The narrator concludes the story by saying that he has found manuscripts of Quixote's further adventures.
Part 2
The third foray
Don Quixote and Sancho set off for El Toboso to meet Dulcinea, although Sancho is aware that his stories about Dulcinea are pure invention. They reach the town at dawn, but decide not to enter until nightfall. However, a bad omen causes Quixote to retreat and they quickly leave the town again. Quixote then sends Sancho off alone to meet Dulcinea and act as a mediator. By a stroke of luck, Sancho encounters three peasant women by the wayside and hastily claims that they are Dulcinea and her ladies-in-waiting, who are as beautiful as ever. As Quixote only sees the peasant women, Sancho pretends that a spell is at work that hides Dulcinea's true beauty.
A duke and duchess who meet the duo decide to join in the game for fun and initiate a series of adventures and pranks. In one of these pranks, Quixote and Sancho are convinced that the only way to lift Dulcinea's enchantment is for Sancho to administer 3300 lashes to himself. Naturally, Sancho resists, which leads to an argument with his master. Under the duke's patronage, Sancho finally receives the promised governorship, but it is a farce. He nevertheless shows himself to be a wise and practical ruler before the affair ends in humiliation. Towards the end, Don Quixote reluctantly begins to turn to reason.
Quixote fights on the beach in Barcelona against the Knight of the White Moon, a young man from Quixote's home town who had previously pretended to be the Knight of Mirrors. After his defeat, Quixote submits to the previously agreed chivalric conditions: He must lay down his arms and not perform any knightly deeds for a year, in the hope of his friends and relatives that he might be cured in that time.
On his return to his village, Quixote announces his plan to retire to the countryside as a shepherd. However, his housekeeper implores him to remain at home. Soon afterwards, he retires to his bed with a fatal illness and later wakes up from a dream in which he has become Alonso Quijano again. Sancho tries in vain to restore his faith and his interest in Dulcinea. Quijano, however, renounces his former ambition and apologizes for the suffering he has caused. He dictates his will, which stipulates, among other things, that his niece will be disinherited if she marries a man who reads books on chivalry.
After Quixote's death, the author emphasizes that there are no more stories to tell and that any future works about Don Quixote would not be genuine.
