Dracula
Bram Stoker


Bram Stoker's "Dracula" is undisputedly the most influential vampire novel of all time. With its dark atmosphere, its captivating characters, its unique style and its exploration of themes such as love, power and the battle between good and evil, Stoker has created a timeless classic that has significantly shaped the genre of horror literature. The book tells the gripping story of Count Dracula, who comes from Transylvania to England to wreak havoc, and the subsequent efforts of a group of men and women to stop him.
Summary
The story is told in the form of a collection of letters from the various main characters and begins on May 3, 1890 with the young lawyer Jonathan Harker, who is sent to Transylvania by his boss Peter Hawkins to oversee the purchase of a house in London by a Transylvanian nobleman, Count Dracula.
At the beginning of his journey, however, the young man comes into contact with the superstitious and fearful world of the locals, who try to prevent him from visiting the Count, who turns out to be a respected nobleman who has decided to move to England.
As the days go by, some details become more and more frightening until the Count's dark secret is revealed: He is in fact a sinister monster who feeds on the blood of the living. In a word, he is a vampire.
At this point, when Harker's final hour seems to have come, the action shifts to England, with the correspondence between Mina Murray, Harker's fiancée, and Lucy Westenra, his close friend. This is how we get to know the other protagonists: John Seward, a doctor and head of an asylum, Mina and Lucy, who is courted by Seward, the Texan Quincey P. Morris and Sir Arthur Holmwood, to whom she becomes engaged.
In anticipation of Jonathan's return, Mina goes to Whitby to visit Lucy and her family: this is the beginning of a series of strange events. Mina's diary contains not only a series of abnormal behaviors of her friend, but also the daring arrival of a ship in Whitby on a stormy day, whose captain was found dead and tied to the helm.
To better describe the events, the diary is accompanied by a report from an anonymous journalist describing the arrival of the ghost ship in the harbor, from which a large, angry black dog emerges, as well as an excerpt from the ship's logbook, which seems reminiscent of William Hodgson's novel "The Ghost Pirates", in which a terrifying demon haunts the wrecked ship. At the same time, the mental state of Renfield, one of Dr. Seward's patients, begins to deteriorate. He raves about a phantom ruler, while Lucy has obviously become the victim of a vampire (there are bite marks on her neck): all signs of Count Dracula's arrival in England.
Unexpectedly, Mina learns that Jonathan, who has managed to escape from Dracula's castle, is in hospital in Budapest and joins him by marrying him in a hospice run by nuns before returning to England. Meanwhile, Lucy, whose health is beginning to deteriorate, suffers a terrible seizure. Seward sees no better solution than to bring his teacher, the renowned Professor Abraham Van Helsing, from Amsterdam. At first they try to halt Lucy's decline with a series of blood transfusions - all the male protagonists take part in the delicate operation - but Dracula's final attack leads to the death of the girl and her mother, who was in her daughter's room that last night and was already seriously ill.
But the threat is only just beginning: As Van Helsing knows, Lucy has since become a vampire herself and immediately begins to "hunt" children playing near the cemetery where her body is buried. The news would almost have gone unnoticed if the victims had not been children, but the limited information from the press arouses the interest of the two scholars Seward and Van Helsing, who investigate the wounds of the last child: This evidence is enough for Van Helsing to convince himself that it is time to act. First, however, he has to convince both his pupil and Quincey Morris of the existence of this horror and, above all, good Arthur, who has now become Lord Godalming after the death of his father. One terrifying night, they lock Lucy in her crypt, only to return the next day and destroy the undead for good by driving a wooden stake through her heart, which Arthur himself uses as a final gesture of mercy towards his beloved.
Thanks to Lucy's perusal of papers and correspondence, Van Helsing comes into contact with Mina and has the opportunity to read her husband's diary of his stay in Transylvania. The meeting with Mina is of fundamental importance, not only to finally understand who the enemy is that must be faced, but above all because of the help she and her husband give to the company: Namely, thanks to the courageous young woman, they begin to piece together all the little signals, the small clues that Stoker has scattered, most notably the anomalous behavior of Renfield, who in a final moment of clarity will try to warn our heroes of the impending danger. The protagonists invade Dracula's estate in Carfax and bless the crates of earth the vampire had brought from Transylvania to take up residence. But that same night, the Count invades the asylum, kills Renfield and vampirizes Mina to make her his bride for eternity.
Van Helsing, Harker, Seward, Lord Godalming and Morris then tighten the schedule and, with the help of consecrated hosts (which Van Helsing had brought with him from Amsterdam), sterilize all the Count's other London hideouts, forcing him to flee with the only chest of earth he had kept for himself.
The group decides to pursue the Count to destroy him once and for all and save Mina's soul, and travel to Varna where they wait for the ship carrying the chest. To catch him, the hunters split into three groups: Jonathan and Lord Godalming, Seward and Quincey Morris, and Van Helsing and Mina.
The final challenge takes place on November 6, 1890 in the mountains where the castle stands and is recorded in Mina's diary. After Van Helsing sterilizes the place and kills Dracula's brides, the professor and Mina, along with the rest of the troupe, fight the group of gypsies escorting the vampire's chest. After the exhausting victory against the gypsies, shortly before sunset, Jonathan decapitates the dying Dracula and Quincey pierces his heart. The vampire turns to dust with a smile of relief on his lips. Quincey Morris dies from a wound sustained in battle.
Seven years later, Mina and Jonathan give birth to a son, who is given the name Quincey in memory of their friend who lost his life in the destruction of Count Dracula.
