Fahrenheit 451
Ray Bradbury


"Fahrenheit 451" by Ray Bradbury is a dystopian novel set in a future where books are outlawed and firefighters are charged with the task of burning any they come across. The title stands for the temperature at which paper ignites. The novel's protagonist, Guy Montag, is initially such a fireman, but as the story progresses he begins to question his role in society and the authority of the state, which demands the destruction of books.
Summary
In the not-too-distant future of America, the perception of culture has changed dramatically, and most of the old cultural media, including books, have become illegal. The law is enforced by firefighters.
Guy Montag is a fireman whose job it is to burn down houses where books have been found. He loves his job, but secretly takes books from the houses he is supposed to burn. Guy also likes to go for walks at night. On one walk, he meets a new neighbor, Clarisse MacLellan, who wants to talk about feelings and thoughts, is fascinated by nature and is interested in books. When he sees Clarisse, Montag realizes that he wants to change his life. He decides to quit his job and pretends to be ill for a day.
Fire Chief Beatty gives Guy a day to recover, saying that every firefighter has moments like this in his life. But then he hints to him that Montag should burn the book he stole and hid under his pillow. Beatty argues that the destruction of books serves to make everyone happy. Without books, there would be no contradictory thoughts and theories, no one would stand out, no one would become smarter than their neighbor. The lives of the citizens of this society are absolutely free of negative emotions - all they do is have fun. Even human death has been "simplified" - now the bodies of the dead are cremated in just five minutes so as not to disturb anyone.
Montag tries to make sense of his thoughts. He starts pulling books out of a hiding place behind the ventilation grille and reading passages from them. He asks his wife to help him, but Mildred doesn't understand him. She is horrified by what is happening and screams that he is going to ruin her. She withdraws from him, puts on headphones and talks to her TV "relatives".
Guy remembers an old man he met in the park a year ago. Faber is a former English professor. When he met Montag, the old man jumped up and wanted to run away. But Montag stopped him and started talking about the weather. Faber became more talkative and even recited some poems by heart. Faber wrote his address on a piece of paper. Guy finds the former professor's card in a drawer labeled "Upcoming investigation". He calls Faber and arrives at his house with a Bible. Montag asks to be taught to understand what he is reading. Faber gives him a miniature transceiver for emergency communication, similar to a hearing aid. They agree on a joint approach: With the help of a printer, copies of the books are to be made to await the war that will destroy the existing order. In the hope that their whispers will be heard in the ensuing silence and not the interactive television sets.
Guy returns to work with an earpiece in his ear. That evening, his wife and two neighbors, Miss Clara Phelps and Mrs. Bawels, to whom Montag, exasperated by their chatter, has been reading poetry by Dover Shore, denounce Guy for keeping books at home. Beatty arranges things so that Montag receives a call to burn down his own house. He is followed by an electric dog, which the fireman has always been afraid of - he was sure the dog had turned on him. On the instructions of the fire chief, Guy burns down his own house and then kills Beatty with a jet of flame from a flamethrower, stuns two firemen and incinerates the electric dog. Still, the dog manages to stick him with a procaine needle, and one of Guy's legs goes numb, slowing him down. Sirens are heard everywhere, police cars chase him, and an organized chase with police helicopters begins.
Guy is almost hit by a car and saved by his fall. The car swerved at the last second to avoid Montag. Guy picks up the books and takes them to Mrs. Black and her husband, a fireman. Then he goes to the former professor's house. There, the landlord turns on the TV and they learn that an aerial chase is being broadcast and that a new electric dog has been delivered to track down the culprit. Montag advises his ally to throw a chair into the oven, burn the bedspread and the doormat in the hallway, and wash the furniture and all door handles with alcohol. Faber is to run the ventilation in all the rooms at full speed, spray everything in the house with mothballs, turn on the watering machines in the garden, flush the paths with hoses - to lose Guy's trail. They also agree to meet in St. Louis in a week or two, provided they stay alive. Montag has to write to Faber, who will visit the print shop. Guy takes a suitcase with his partner's old belongings and leaves his house.
Montag makes his way to the river, changes his clothes, goes into the water, is swept away by the current and driven into the darkness. The electric dog loses its trail by the river. When Guy emerges from the water, he goes into the forest, finds a railroad track leading from the city to the interior, sees a fire in the distance and walks towards its light. There he meets a group of people who are very friendly to him. They have a portable television, so they already know Guy. They give him a vial of colorless liquid to change the smell of his sweat. Half an hour later, Guy smells like a completely different person. On TV, they see Monday's death being staged - an electric dog kills a random passer-by with his procaine needle instead.
It turns out that Guy's new acquaintances belong to a community that keeps lines of literary works in their heads until tyranny is destroyed and literary culture is restored (they're afraid to keep printed books, as they might betray the rebels' sentiments). Each of them knows some literary works by heart. Montag also remembers some passages from the biblical books - the Book of Ecclesiastes and the Revelation of John the Evangelist - and joins their community.
In the blink of an eye, the war begins and ends, and the group of professors and Guy watch from afar as the city is almost completely destroyed in an air raid. Faber escapes death because he is on a bus to another city. After this event, the dissidents make their way back to the city, driven by the hope of making a fresh start with the survivors.
