Faust
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe


Faust I and II by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe are masterpieces of German literature that together form an epic play. They tell the story of Dr. Faust, a scholar who, in despair at the limits of human knowledge and experience, makes a pact with the devil, Mephistopheles, in order to experience life in all its fullness. While "Faust I" (1808) focuses on Faust's quest for personal fulfillment and his tragic love story with Gretchen, "Faust II" (1832) expands the theme to social and metaphysical levels by describing Faust's continuing adventures and philosophical quests.
Summary
Faust I
Faust is a scholar who has earned his doctorate and strives to master all knowledge. He has studied in all four faculties of his university - philosophy, law, medicine and theology. Despite this extensive education, he complains that he has become no wiser than before. He is frustrated because he has not been able to satisfy his endless desire for knowledge and is disappointed by the finite nature of human existence.
Mephistopheles, the devil, transforms himself into a black dog and sneaks into Faust's study. There he speaks to Faust, who, despite his extensive studies, has not found fulfillment in science and instead strives for a fulfilled life. Mephistopheles offers Faust to serve him as a companion, servant or slave and to use his own magic to give him the greatest pleasures that no one has ever experienced before. He promises Faust more pleasure than any man has ever had, but in return demands that Faust serve him in the same way in the afterlife when they meet again. Faust, who has no interest in life after death anyway, accepts the proposal and promises to give his soul to Mephistopheles.
Mephistopheles first takes Dr. Faust to the witch's kitchen and gives him a rejuvenating potion brewed by the witch. Rejuvenated and at the same time lustful, Faust indulges in various pleasures and glimpses of life in search of the most beautiful moment. The first pleasure he tries out is the passion of love. After seeing the reflection of a woman of supreme beauty in a witch's mirror in a witch's kitchen, Faust was constantly on the lookout for her image and fell in love at first sight with Margaret ("Gretchen"), a simple, pious girl he met on the street.
Faust persuades Mephistopheles to woo Gretchen with expensive jewels in order to win her friendship. Eventually, Faust and Gretchen spend a night together. One night, however, Gretchen's brother Valentin bumps into Faust and Mephistopheles. Valentin, who has heard rumors that his sister is in a relationship with a man, challenges Faust to a duel.
As a temporary distraction, Mephistopheles takes Dr. Faust to Walpurgis Night, a festival of the evil spirits of the mountains and rivers. As they wander through a crowd of witches and ghosts, Faust has a vision of Gretchen, who has a red welt on her neck. He learns that she is threatened with execution by beheading. Faust is furious that Mephistopheles has withheld this information from him. In fact, Gretchen had become pregnant as a result of her affair with Faust and had drowned the child in a swamp out of despair after the birth. As a result, Gretchen was accused of premarital sex and infanticide and thrown into prison.
Faust and Mephistopheles rush to Gretchen's aid in prison. However, the mad but still pious woman sees the devil's shadow behind Faust and resolutely refuses to break out of prison. Faust is plagued by feelings of guilt and despair. Mephistopheles exclaims that she has been condemned as a sinner, but at this moment an (angelic) voice sounds from above saying that she is saved. Faust leaves Margaret alone in prison and leaves the scene as Me-phisto pulls him away.
Faust II
The play consists of five acts, each of which is a relatively independent story. In the first act, Faust wakes up on a spring morning in a lovely place. The fairies prepare Faust for the healing sleep of oblivion in order to distract him from the terrible end of Gretchen's tragedy in Faust I. At the court of the German Emperor, Faust appears as a magician with the help of Mephistopheles. With the invention of paper money, he temporarily solves the Emperor's already great financial difficulties.
After a dream-like masquerade, Faust first goes to the place where life takes shape and enters the "realm of the mothers", before summoning the spirits of Helen of Troy and her lover Paris in the courtroom.
In the second act, Wagner, a Faustian disciple, creates an artificial human being. He transports the protagonists to the "Classical Walpurgis Night". This is where the Greek gods and monsters make their appearance. Here Goethe has demonstrated his admirable ability to transcend time and space and combine different themes in one work.
The third act tells of Faust's love affair with Helen. Faust and Helen have a son, Euphorion. When Euphorion falls to his death at the end of the act, Helen disappears. The relationship between Faust and Helen symbolizes the relationship between classical antiquity (Helen) and the romantic Germanic Middle Ages (Faust). This relationship is very typical of the human history of modern Europe. The modern, high-flying creation was doomed to fail - as the fall of Euphorion to his death clearly shows. The greatness of antiquity is unattainable for modern man.
In the fourth act, Mephisto and Faust return to the Emperor, who at this point is at war with a rival. With the support of summoned mountain gods, the Emperor achieves a victory. As a reward for his help, Faust is given part of the empire's coastline.
Driven by his desire for control, Faust causes the deaths of three people in the fifth act: a traveler and a gentle old couple, Philemon and Baucis. At this point, Faust is 100 years old and blind. He mistakes the sound of a shovel digging his grave for the sound of people working. Finally, the end of his fate approaches, and in his last moments he recognizes a wonderful moment that relates to his vision of a future, peaceful and free society. At this moment, he falls to the ground and dies.
However, Mephisto is unable to rejoice as the forces of justice save Faust's soul and take it to heaven.
