Foucault's Pendulum
Umberto Eco


"Foucault's Pendulum" by Umberto Eco is a sophisticated and captivating novel that takes the reader on an exciting journey through complex topics such as conspiracy theories, history, philosophy and the occult. The novel tells the story of three publishing employees - Casaubon, Belbo and Diotallevi - who, out of boredom, invent a conspiracy theory that links the history of the world from the Knights Templar to the present day. But what begins as an entertaining intellectual game soon turns into a dangerous adventure when other people begin to believe in their invented conspiracy.
Summary
The book begins with a man named Casaubon hiding in the Musée des Arts et Métiers after it closes. Casaubon believes that a secret society has kidnapped his friend Jacopo Belbo and is now stalking him. He expects the secret society to meet in the museum. As he waits, Casaubon reflects on the life that has led him there, but it is implied that he is an unreliable narrator whose mind has been twisted by conspiracy theories.
In 1970s Milan, Casaubon, who had taken part in the 1968 riots as a student, is preoccupied with the Knights Templar when he meets Belbo and his colleague Diotallevi. Belbo works as an editor at a publishing house and invites Casaubon to review a manuscript about the Templars. Colonel Ardenti's manuscript claims that he has discovered a secret Templar plan to take over world domination. Ardenti disappears under mysterious circumstances after meeting Belbo and Casaubon. Casaubon then moves to Brazil to begin a relationship with a woman named Amparo, where he meets Agliè, an older man posing as the mystical Comte de Saint-Germain. Casaubon's relationship with Amparo falls apart after he participates in an Umbanda rite and he returns to Milan, where he is hired as a researcher by Belbo's employer, Mr. Garamond. Casaubon learns that Garamond not only owns a prestigious publishing house, but also Manutius, a vanity publishing house that charges incompetent authors large sums of money to print their works. Garamond has the idea of starting two series of occult books, one for serious publishing and the other to be published by Manutius to attract more vanity authors. Agliè, now also in Milan, becomes Garamond's advisor. Belbo becomes jealous of Agliè's ability to charm Belbo's former lover Lorenza.
Belbo, Diotallevi and Casaubon delve into occult manuscripts that establish spurious connections between historical events and come up with the idea of developing their own game. Using Belbo's personal computer, "Abulafia," and Ardenti's manuscript, the three devise what they call "the plan" by employing a program that randomly rearranges the text. The plan becomes an intricate web of conspiracy theories about the Templars and their goal to reshape the world using "telluric currents" centered on the Foucault pendulum. Alongside numerous other historical organizations allegedly involved in the plan, the three invent a fictitious secret society, the Tres (Templi Resurgentes Equites Synarchici, Latin for "the Risen again Synarchic Knights of the Temple").
The three become increasingly obsessed with the plan and wonder whether it could be true. Diotallevi is diagnosed with cancer and believes this to be divine retribution for his role in the plan. Belbo, overcome by his jealousy of Lorenza, talks to Agliè about the plan and claims to be in possession of a Templar map of the telluric currents; Agliè demands to see it, which he is denied. Agliè, Garamond, Ardenti and many of the manuscript authors are convinced they are the Tres, with Agliè being their leader, forcing Belbo to come with him to Paris. Casaubon goes to Belbo's apartment and reads his personal files, then travels to Paris and Foucault's Pendulum to meet Agliè and his companions.
In the present, a group led by Agliè gathers around the pendulum to perform an arcane ritual. Casaubon sees several ectoplasmic figures appear, one of whom claims to be the real Comte de Saint-Germain and denounces Agliè in front of his followers. Belbo is questioned but refuses to reveal what he knows, which triggers a riot in which Belbo is hanged by Foucault's pendulum. Casaubon escapes from the museum and flees to the villa in the country where Belbo grew up. He soon discovers that Diotallevi succumbed to cancer at midnight on St. John's Eve, coincidentally the same time as Belbo's death.
Casaubon reflects on the events and has resigned himself to being captured by the Tres, and he will follow Belbo's example and say nothing to them. While waiting in the villa, Casaubon finds an old manuscript written by Belbo in which he recounts a mystical experience he had as a twelve-year-old in which he recognized a meaning beyond signs and semiotics. He comes to understand that many of Belbo's actions, including the creation of the plan and even his death, were possibly driven by his quest to uncover this lost meaning.
