Frankenstein
Mary Shelley


"Frankenstein; or, The Modern Prometheus" by Mary Shelley is a central text in English literature and is considered one of the earliest and most influential works of sci-fi and the horror genre. The novel tells the story of Victor Frankenstein, an ambitious young scientist who creates a living being from dead materials. The resulting consequences of his actions unfold in a tragic story about human nature, responsibility and isolation.
Summary
In the frame story, the expedition ship chartered by the wealthy private Robert Walton picks up the seriously ill Victor Frankenstein in the Arctic, who is on his way to the North Pole. Frankenstein tells the adventurer his life story.
Victor Frankenstein, a medical student in Ingolstadt, is obsessed with finding out "the secrets of heaven and earth". In his quest to unravel "the mysterious soul of man", Victor creates a body by assembling various parts of dissected corpses. It should be noted that nowhere in the original story is there any mention of the use of electricity to bring the creature to life; although Victor Frankenstein admits to being gripped by the power of electrical storms and even mentions the possibilities of galvanism, nowhere in the text is there any mention of the 2.44 meter (8 feet) tall creature being animated by electricity. Frankenstein is careful not to reveal any details about his experiments in order to prevent anyone from recreating such an abomination. Frankenstein's monster is known in popular culture as "Frankenstein", but in reality it has no real name throughout the work.
Victor Frankenstein realizes the horror he has created, rejects the results of his experiment in horror and flees his laboratory. Upon his return, he finds that the monster has vanished and believes the ordeal is finished. But the shadow of his sin haunts him: after escaping from the laboratory, the monster senses the rejection of humanity and hatred and a desire for revenge awaken in him. After a period of convalescence due to overwork and after learning of the murder of his younger brother William, Victor returns to his hometown of Geneva with his family and fiancée, only to discover that behind the crime lies the rage of the creature he brought to life. Victor's guilt intensifies when he allows one of the family's servants - Justine Moritz - to be sentenced to death and executed, accused of the crime.
Victor decides to go to the mountains to regain his dwindling spirits. Near Montblanc, he meets the monster again. The monster tells him how it learned to speak by secretly spying on a family. It offered the family small gifts anonymously, but the family rejected the monster when they saw its appearance - a rejection that was repeated with every encounter with humans. The creature then promises never to enter Victor's life again, but asks him, as its creator, to complete his work and create a companion for him.
His speech and his motives are so impressive that Victor agrees to the request and promises to create a companion for him. He sets up a new laboratory on an island in Scotland. There he begins to experiment again. But his remorse is strong and he finally decides to destroy the second creation before he can bring it to life. The monster, who has been following Victor's work closely, swears revenge. This revenge consists of the murder of his best friend Henry and then the murder of Victor's betrothed Elizabeth on their wedding night. Because of all these deaths in his family, Victor's father Alphonse dies of profound sadness.
Finally, Victor is determined to put an end to his creation and pursues the creature to the edge of the world, on his way to the North Pole. Victor finally collapses from cold and exhaustion and encounters a ship on its way to the North Pole, which picks him up in the middle of the Arctic ice. He receives help from the crew, befriends Captain Robert Walton and tells him his whole horrific story. But a few days later he dies without having fulfilled his wish to kill the monster.
The novel ends with the remorse-stricken creature entering the ship and promising the captain that it will put an end to its miserable existence.
The monster declares that it will leave the ship, take the sledge and drive to the northernmost place in the world. There it would collect everything that could burn in order to build a pyre on which its wretched body could be burned.
