Gone with the Wind
Margaret Mitchell


"Gone with the Wind" by Margaret Mitchell is an epic historical novel set before and during the American Civil War and Reconstruction Era in the southern United States. The story follows the spirited Scarlett O'Hara, a young woman from a plantation-owning family whose life is dramatically changed by the war, personal loss and a series of romantic entanglements.
Summary
In the spring of 1861, life in Georgia flows peacefully. Rumors of war are circulating as the state of Georgia has left the Union to become a Confederate state. The Confederates want to keep their slaves and are sure they are in the right. As proud and brave men, they only concern themselves with the war to fuel their conversations. They are convinced that even if a conflict breaks out, they will defeat the Yankees within a few months. Unfortunately for them, the war does not lead to a quick victory for the Confederate armies.
In this novel, we experience the full disillusionment of Scarlett O'Hara, a girl from a wealthy family of cotton planters.
At 16, full of life and gaiety, she has more charm than any other young girl in the county. She has always got what she wanted and the young men she is with are all crazy about her. But secretly she loves Ashley Wilkes, the incorrigible dreamer who is passionate about literature, poetry and music. When she learns that he is to marry Melanie Hamilton, she is deeply shocked and experiences her first grief.
Like a spoiled child, Scarlett tries to win Ashley back, whatever the cost, and she loathes Melanie, the nice Melanie who can only see the good in people. On the day she finds out that Ashley is getting married, she makes an unusual acquaintance. In a world where everyone adheres so well to convention, she comes face to face with the gloomy Captain Rhett Butler: a man who brags about not being a gentleman and who is kept away from all social gatherings. In defiance, she agrees to marry Melanie's brother Charles on the same day.
The marriage is short-lived as her husband dies of an illness, leaving Scarlett pregnant. She gives birth to a boy (Wade), for whom she has hardly any maternal feelings. She is disgusted that her life as a happy young woman is over and despairs. Her mother suggests that she move in with her sister-in-law Melanie in Atlanta. She agrees, because living with Melanie gives her the best chance of seeing Ashley again, whom she still hopes to win over. There she learns about the hardships and has to take part in caring for the wounded, which she detests. Ashley comes on leave for a few days, and when she finally manages to get a moment alone with him, hoping he'll finally kiss her and commit to her, he asks her for a favor: She should look after Melanie while he is away. Because of the promise she made him that day, she is unable to escape during the siege of the city of Atlanta, as Melanie is pregnant. When she gives birth under dire circumstances, she asks Rhett (who takes the opportunity to ask her to become his mistress) to help her escape the city and return to her cotton plantation (Tara). She learns that her mother is seriously ill and can't bear to be away from her.
When Scarlett returns home, she finds her mother dead and her father descending into a gentle madness. The estate is desolate and famine threatens. Scarlett vows to free her family from this state and becomes determined, cold and calculating. She fights for her own survival and that of her family. Her most loyal ally is Melanie and Scarlett is impressed by her courage.
In order to pay the disproportionately high taxes she is being asked to pay for Tara, she returns to Atlanta and asks Rhett in vain for financial support. Then she meets her sister's fiancé Suellen, and when she finds out that he has some money on the high side, she lies to him that her sister no longer wants him and marries him. In this way, she saves Tara without caring about her sister's feelings. She runs her husband's business with an iron hand while giving birth to a little daughter (Ella) to whom she attaches no more importance than to her brother. Although she tries to deny this, she feels increasing respect for her rival Melanie, who has shared her plight with Tara.
Because she was physically assaulted, Scarlett's husband, who belongs to the Ku Klux Klan, organizes a punitive expedition in which he loses his life. Although Scarlett is not sad about her new widowhood, she tends to consume more and more alcohol. Rhett proposes marriage, and the prospect of a life of safety and the pleasures that wealth will bring makes her say "yes". She gives birth to Bonnie, for whom she has more motherly feelings than for her other children and whom Rhett adores. But Ashley still preoccupies her too much, and she makes it clear to Rhett that she no longer wants marital relations. Offended, Rhett is forced to accept this. Out of greed, Scarlett agrees to trade with the English war profiteers, turning Atlanta's high society against her. When Ashley reminisces with Scarlett about times past, he innocently embraces her, but two gossips present spread the rumor that she has committed adultery. That same night, Rhett forces Scarlett to go to a party at Ashley and Melanie's house with the intention of seeing her take on all of Atlanta society, which hates her. Melanie, who always stands up for Scarlett no matter the cost, refuses to believe anything she's told and stands as a bulwark between Scarlett and high society.
Scarlett arrives home to find her drunken husband dragging her into the bedroom. She wakes up changed and determined to lead a quiet family life. Rhett, however, disagrees and accuses Scarlett of being a bad mother: he goes traveling with their daughter for several months. The little girl still cries for her mother and when he returns, he finds Scarlett pregnant. He tells Scarlett, who is angry about the new pregnancy, that accidents happen and she might lose the child. Outraged, Scarlett tries to hit him, but falls down the stairs. She suffers a miscarriage and, in a more or less conscious delirium, demands Rhett's affection. Since he is not by her side, he knows nothing about it. During her recovery, Rhett, fearful that he has almost lost Scarlett, proposes to get their married life back on track: Scarlett agrees, but at the same time their daughter Bonnie falls from a horse to her death.
Rhett is completely devastated, and Scarlett accuses him of being responsible for Bonnie's tragic death. From then on, reconciliation is no longer possible. Pregnant Melanie becomes seriously ill after a miscarriage and is dying. She requests Scarlett's presence and, on her deathbed, advises her to take good care of Rhett, who loves her so much. This is a revelation for Scarlett: she finally discovers her feelings for her rival Melanie and her love for Rhett. She also realizes that her feelings for Ashley are long gone. When she realizes that she loves Rhett, she sets out to find him, but he has left the Wilkes' house because the sight of the dying Melanie is unbearable for him: Melanie is the only important woman he has ever known, and he feels great admiration and affection for her. When Scarlett meets him at her house, she finally confesses her love for him, but it is too late. Rhett leaves her and makes it clear that he wants nothing more to do with her. True to her character, Scarlett does not accept this fate and, driven by her new love for Rhett, vows to win him back.
