Great Expectations
Charles Dickens


"Great Expectations" by Charles Dickens is a central novel in the history of English literature and one of Dickens' best-known and most popular works. The work captivates the reader with its gripping plot, vivid characters and profound social criticism. The story follows the life of Pip, an orphan boy who is lifted out of poverty by a mysterious monetary gift and finds himself in the upper echelons of English society. The novel deals with social differences, the question of true humanity and the search for identity.
Summary
The main character of the novel is Pip (short for Philip Pirrip), an orphan who is just over six years old at the beginning of the story and lives with his sister, who is many years older, and her husband. His relationship with his sister is not very good, as she is manic and often beats him with a stick, while Pip is very fond of his brother-in-law, the blacksmith Joe Gargery.
The story begins with a key event: on Christmas Eve 1812, young Pip, who has been visiting the graves of family members in the local cemetery, meets an escaped convict called Magwitch, who orders him to bring him food and a file to saw off the chains that still bind him. The child, who is afraid of the convict, steals food from the house pantry, although he fears that his sister will discover him and punish him severely. However, the convict's escape is short-lived: the next day, the soldiers catch him in a brawl with another escaped convict; both are locked up again.
Later, the boy visits the estate of the eccentric Miss Havisham, a wealthy spinster who lives as a voluntary hermit in her half-ruined house (Satis House) and always wears a wedding dress, having been abandoned decades earlier by her fiancé on the eve of their wedding. This is also where Pip meets Estella, with whom he falls in love. Adopted by Miss Havisham and brought up in a genteel manner, she despises Pip because of his humble origins and rough upbringing.
Pip is hired and paid to be the old woman's 'playmate', but although this is considered great good fortune by all, the boy is not very happy about it, as entering the house instills a sense of dread in him, as it is always dark: a condition which, it is eventually discovered, was imposed by the old woman, who was abandoned on her wedding day by her fiancé, who had informed her by letter that he had eloped with another woman. Miss Havisham, in her grief, had decided to leave the house as it was when she opened the letter, including the wedding cake that had been moldering on a table for decades; moreover, to get back at the men, Miss Havisham had decided to adopt the beautiful orphan girl Estella to make her the object of desire for all the men, without them ever being able to have her.
One day, during Joe's absence to visit his nephew, Mrs. Gargery is attacked by a mysterious person (who later turns out to be Orlick, Joe's assistant) and is left disabled and mute forever. Later, after Pip has apprenticed at his brother-in-law's forge, a lawyer named Jaggers appears and informs him that he has received a large sum of money from a mysterious benefactor who wishes to remain anonymous.
Pip accepts the enormous fortune and believes it was given to him by his elderly patron Miss Havisham, who had taken a liking to him. The new economic opportunities that suddenly present themselves open up great hopes for Pip: He moves to London to complete his studies and enter high society. Despite all this, Pip fails to settle fully into the worldly life of the great capital, partly because he is disappointed by Estella's marriage to a ruffian called Bentley Drummle, whom she herself believes to be one.
Years later, Pip, now grown up, learns that his fortune came from the culprit Magwitch, who had been deported to Australia and made a fortune there. He had retained his gratitude and his good memory for the child who had helped him at the time. Magwitch visits Pip in London, risking his life as he has escaped deportation and a warrant has been issued for his arrest. He would surely be hanged if he were discovered. The revelation that Magwitch was the financier plunges Pip into deepest despair as he is forced to hide a fugitive. Pip believes that he cannot chase him away without being guilty of profound ingratitude.
He also learns that Estella is the daughter of Magwitch and Molly, Mr. Jaggers' maid. Important events take place during Pip's stay in the town: He forms a close friendship with Herbert and comes into direct contact with Mr. Jaggers, the middleman who gave him Magwitch's money; also, his sister and Bentley Drummle die. After a final visit to her house, Miss Havisham accidentally sets fire to her bridal train and ends up setting the whole house on fire; Pip manages to save her, but the old woman eventually dies of her serious injuries.
Shortly afterwards, Pip receives a message inviting him to his hometown to discuss important matters, but he falls into a trap set by Joe's blacksmith Orlick, a violent and evil being who locks him in a hut to kill him, but is rescued by Herbert and his colleague.
The three then decide to let Magwitch escape to a foreign country. They devise a plan to enable Magwitch to escape on a ship, but are discovered. During the escape attempt, Magwitch kills his old pal Compeyson, who is a swindler and used to be engaged to Miss Havisham.
Magwitch is sentenced to death, but dies before the execution. At the same time, Pip is no longer able to maintain his usual luxurious life, let alone finish his studies, due to the expenses he had to incur in London, and so he returns to his home town; there he finds Joe, who is married to his former teacher Biddy.
The young man, now penniless, goes to Egypt with his friend Herbert and his wife, where he begins to earn a living as a scribe. Eleven years later, Pip returns to the ruins of Satis House and reunites with Estella, who has been humbled by her marriage to the violent husband who abused her until his death. Estella and Pip take each other by the hand and decide to remain friends. The year is 1846, and more than three decades have passed since Pip met the escaped convict in the graveyard.
