Gulliver's Travels
Jonathan Swift


"Gulliver's Travels" by Jonathan Swift is a fascinating and satirical adventure story. The book, often misunderstood as a children's book, is a profound and sharp critique of human nature and 18th century society. It tells the adventures of Lemuel Gulliver, a ship's doctor, who encounters various exotic lands and cultures on his travels, including the land of the Lilliputians, the Giants of Brobdingnag, the flying island of Laputa and the land of the Houyhnhnms. Swift satirically questions various aspects of human nature, politics and science.
Summary
Part I: Gulliver's Journey to Lilliput
During his initial journey, Gulliver is stranded on a shore after a shipwreck and finds himself captive to tiny humans, barely six inches (15 cm) tall, who populate the island territory of Lilliput. After promising to behave appropriately, he is given a place to stay in Lilliput and becomes a favorite of the Lilliputian royal court. The King of Lilliput also allows him to move around the city, provided he does not harm the inhabitants.
At the beginning, the Lilliputians are hospitable to Gulliver, but are skeptical about the threat posed by his enormous size. The Lilliputians turn out to be a society that attaches great importance to trivial matters. For example, the question of which side to crack an egg from becomes a major source of political disagreement among the people. They are a community that finds pleasure in the demonstration of authority and the exercise of power. Gulliver assists the Lilliputians in defeating their opponents, the Blefuscudians, by stealing their naval fleet. However, he refuses to turn the island kingdom of Blefuscu into a province of Lilliput, which displeases the monarch and the royal court.
Gulliver is accused of high treason for various offenses, including urinating inside the capital - even though he was in the process of putting out a fire. He is put on trial and sentenced to blindness. Thanks to the help of a close friend, a high-ranking figure at court, he flees to Blefuscu. There he comes across an orphaned boat and sails out to be rescued by a passing ship. This, together with some Lilliputians he has with him, brings him home safely.
Part II: Gulliver's journey to Brobdingnag
Gulliver sets off on another journey. The sailing boat "Adventure" is blown off course by a storm and is forced to go ashore in search of fresh water. Gulliver is left behind by his crew on a peninsula on the west coast of North America.
The grass in Brobdingnag is as tall as a tree. Gulliver is discovered by a farmer whose height he estimates at around 22 meters (72 feet), based on his stride length of 9 meters (29 feet). The gigantic farmer takes Gulliver to his home, where his daughter Glumdalclitch looks after him. Gulliver is treated like a sensation by the farmer and put on display for money. After a while, this constant presentation makes Gulliver ill and the farmer sells him to the queen of the kingdom. Glumdalclitch, who had accompanied her father to Gulliver's exhibition, is commissioned to look after Gulliver as the Queen's servant. As Gulliver is too small to use the huge chairs, beds and cutlery, the Queen has a small house built for him to be transported in, which becomes known as his "travelling box".
Gulliver has small adventures in which he fights giant wasps and is carried to the roof by a monkey. In between, he talks to the King of Brobdingnag about the situation in Europe. The king is not happy with Gulliver's depictions of Europe, especially when it comes to the use of firearms and cannons. During a trip to the seaside, his travelling box is snatched by a huge eagle, which drops Gulliver and his box into the sea, where he is found by sailors and brought back to England.
Part III: Gulliver's voyages to Laputa, Balnibarbi, Luggnagg, Glubbdubdrib and Japan
During his further sea voyage, Gulliver's ship is attacked by pirates, stranding him near an isolated rocky island in the vicinity of India. He is rescued by the flying island of Laputa, a kingdom devoted mainly to the disciplines of mu-sic, mathematics and astronomy, but unable to use this knowledge for practical applications.
As part of military operations, it is customary in Laputa to bombard rebellious cities on the ground with boulders.
As the guest of a subordinate court official, Gulliver explores Balnibarbi, the kingdom ruled by Laputa. There, in a sharp satire on bureaucracy and the Royal Society and its experts, he observes the destruction caused by exclusively theoretical scientific research without practical results. At the Great Academy of Lagado in Balnibarbi, enormous resources and manpower are devoted to bizarre projects such as extracting sunlight from cucumbers, softening marble for use in pillows, learning to mix colors by smell, and uncovering political intrigue by examining the bowel movements of suspects. Gulliver is then directed to the main shipping port of Maldonado in Balnibarbi to wait for a merchant to transport him to Japan.
While waiting for the crossing, Gulliver takes a short side trip to the island of Glubbdubdrib, southwest of Balnibarbi. On Glubbdubdrib, he visits the home of a magician and has discussions with the ghosts of historical figures, including Julius Caesar, Brutus, Homer, Aristotle, René Descartes and Pierre Gassendi.
On the island of Luggnagg, he meets the struldbrugs, people who are immortal. However, they do not possess the gift of eternal youth, but endure the infirmities of ageing and are declared dead at the age of 80.
After a stopover in Japan, Gulliver finally returns home, determined to live out the rest of his days there.
Part IV: Gulliver's journey to the land of the Houyhnhnms
Despite his original decision to stay at home, Gulliver, bored with his job as a surgeon, returns to sea as captain of a merchant ship. On this voyage, he has to take on new crew members who he believes have conspired against him. His crew revolts as a result. After holding him for a while, they decide to leave him behind on the first piece of land they find and sail on as pirates. He is taken ashore in a rowing boat and encounters a race of deformed, primitive, humanoid creatures with whom he develops a strong dislike. Soon after, he encounters the Houyhnhnms, a species of articulate horses. They are the rulers, while the deformed humanoid creatures are known as Yahoos. Some scholars have described the relationship between the Houyhnhnms and the Yahoos as a kind of master-slave dynamic.
Gulliver becomes part of a Houyhnhnm's household and begins to admire and adapt to the Houyhnhnms and their way of life, while loathing his own species as mere Yahoos, endowed with a kind of sanity that they only use to exacerbate and reinforce their natural vices. However, a convention of Houyhnhnms decides that Gulliver, a Yahoo with a semblance of sanity, poses a threat to their civilization and orders him to return to the land from whence he came. Gulliver's "master," the Houyhnhnm who has welcomed him into his home, allows him time to construct a canoe to aid his departure. After another disastrous sea voyage, he is reluctantly rescued by a Portuguese ship. To his astonishment, he discovers that Captain Pedro de Mendez, whom he thought was a whiner, is a clever, polite and generous man.
He returns to his English home, but cannot come to terms with life among "Yahoos" and becomes a recluse, staying in his house, avoiding his family and wife and spending several hours a day with the horses in his stables.
