Hamlet
William Shakespeare


"Hamlet" by William Shakespeare is one of the most iconic and profound works of world literature. The tragedy tells the story of Prince Hamlet of Denmark, who seeks revenge for the murder of his father by his brother Claudius and is plagued by political machinations and his own inner turmoil. The play is famous for its complex characterization, its rich symbolism and its deep insights into the human psyche and the moral dilemmas of life.
Summary
Act One
Scene I - At midnight, the officer Bernardo takes over from the soldier Francisco. He is joined by Marcellus, another officer of the guard, and Horatio, a friend of Hamlet. They encounter the mute ghost of the deceased king and remember his heroic deeds: He defeated the Norwegian King Fortinbras in a fair fight and conquered all his lands through a pact made before the battle. Denmark is now preparing for war as Fortinbras' son gathers troops at the borders to reclaim his father's lands.
Scene II - In Elsinore Castle, King Claudius sends Cornelius and Voltimand to the King of Norway. Their mission is to put an end to the activities of Fortinbras' nephew, the young Fortinbras. Claudius allows Laertes, the son of Polonius, to continue his studies in France, but refuses to allow Hamlet to return to his studies in Wittenberg. Hamlet is bitter because his uncle Claudius married his mother shortly after his father's funeral. Bernardo, Marcel-lus and Horatio tell Hamlet about his father's appearance as a ghost. Hamlet then resolves to witness the ghost personally.
Scene III - Laerte, who is on his way, warns his sister Ophelia against Hamlet's advances. Polonius does the same.
Scene IV - Midnight. Horatio, Marcellus and Hamlet catch sight of the ghost, who beckons Hamlet to follow him alone. Horatio and Marcellus secretly follow Hamlet.
Scene V - The King's ghost reveals to Hamlet that Claudius has murdered him by dripping poison into his ears after committing adultery with the Queen; the ghost asks Hamlet to avenge him but to spare Hamlet's mother, and then disappears. Horatio and Marcellus join Hamlet and ask him to reveal what the ghost has revealed to him. Hamlet refuses to reveal the details, however, and instead warns them that from now on he will pretend to be mad. He makes them swear not to reveal anything they have seen that night.
Act Two
Scene I - Polonius sends his servant Reynaldo to Paris to spy on his son, whose behavior is a cause for concern. Ophelia describes to her father an encounter with Hamlet in which he appeared to be behaving insanely. Polonius then decides to involve Claudius in the matter.
Scene II - Claudius and Gertrude are disturbed by Hamlet's behavior and send his childhood friends Rosencrantz and Guildenstern to Hamlet to bring him to his senses. Voltemand, aloyal and skilled diplomat, reports to Claudius that the Norwegian king has stopped the young Fortinbras' preparations and diverted the attack on Poland, asking for the right to pass through Denmark. Polonius informs Claudius and Gertrude that Hamlet's madness is due to the fact that Ophelia has rejected his advances. In his dialogues with Polonius, during which he compares Polonius to Jephthah, and then in his conversations with Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, Hamlet reinforces the suspicion that he is mad. A group of actors then appear, and Hamlet asks them to perform "The Murder of Gonzago" the next day, including a tirade he has written. In a soliloquy, Hamlet expresses the hope that the play will make his uncle confess his crimes.
Act Three
Scene I - Claudius and Polonius observe Hamlet's hidden soliloquy ("To be or not to be") followed by his dialog with Ophelia, in which he reproaches her for her immodesty and calls on her to go to a convent. Claudius intends to send Hamlet to England to demand a tribute and facilitate his cure, but Polonius persuades him to let the Queen speak to him before he makes a final decision.
Scene II - Hamlet asks Horatio to observe the King's reaction during the performance. The play, which tells the story of a murder in Vienna, begins and Hamlet does not stop commenting. Claudius suddenly interrupts the play at the moment of the poisoning and withdraws with the queen. Polonius calls Hamlet to the Queen.
Scene III - Claudius senses the danger and instructs Rosencrantz and Guildenstern to accompany Hamlet to England. When he is alone, Claudius reflects on the murder of his brother and asks Heaven for forgiveness. Hamlet secretly watches Claudius as he prays, but decides against killing him at this moment. He fears that Claudius' death during his prayer would send his soul to heaven and therefore postpones his revenge.
Scene IV - Hamlet confronts his mother about her behavior, and as the conversation becomes increasingly heated, Polonius, who has secretly hidden behind a carpet, calls for help. Hamlet, assuming that Claudius is hiding there, stabs through the carpet and accidentally kills Polonius. He charges his mother with the murder of his father. At this moment, the ghost of the deceased King Hamlet appears, but the Queen cannot see him. Hamlet instructs his mother not to tell Claudius about his feigned madness. She swears to keep the conversation secret. Hamlet takes Polonius' body with him to justify his death.
Act Four
Scene I - Gertrude tells of Hamlet's murder of Polonius - but not of the feigning of madness - Claudius sends Rosencrantz and Guildenstern to seize the body.
Scene II - Rosencrantz and Guildenstern ask Hamlet about Polonius' body, but he replies enigmatically and demands that he be taken to Claudius.
Scene III - Hamlet appears before Claudius, who asks him about the whereabouts of Polonius' body. Hamlet finally names the location and pretends to agree to travel to England. In a soliloquy, Claudius reveals that he has asked the English king to kill Hamlet on his arrival.
Scene IV - Hamlet meets Fortinbras, who is traveling to Poland, and muses on the futility of war.
Scene V - An enigmatic exchange takes place between the Queen, the King and Ophelia, who appears to have lost her mind and is singing. Laerte, firmly convinced that Claudius is to blame for his father's death, storms in with a sling to overthrow the king.
Scene VI - During his sea voyage to England, Hamlet encounters Pirates and turns back. His companions continue their journey to England without him. He sends a message to Horatio, who comes to meet him.
Scene VII - The King, who has just revealed to Laertes that Hamlet has killed his father, receives letters from Hamlet: one for himself and one for the Queen. Hamlet announces his return. The King and Laertes then plan together to kill Hamlet during a fencing match disguised as an accident by poisoning Laertes' sword. If this plan fails, Claudius promises to give Hamlet a poisoned drink. Meanwhile, the Queen announces that Ophelia has drowned.
Act Five
Scene I - Two gravediggers discuss Ophelia's apparent suicide as they dig her grave. Hamlet arrives with Horatio and discusses with the gravedigger a skull he has uncovered - the skull of a court jester from Hamlet's childhood, Yorick. The funeral procession for Ophelia approaches, led by Laerte. He and Hamlet come to blows, but the fight is broken off.
Scene II - Hamlet tells Horatio how he escaped and how Rosencrantz and Guildenstern died: They were executed in England because he had forged the royal writ, so they had to die in his place. A courtier, Osric, interrupts the two and challenges Hamlet to fight with Laerte. The battle begins as Fortinbras' army approaches Elsinore. Laerte wounds Hamlet with a poisoned blade, but in the melee they exchange weapons and Hamlet, in turn, strikes a blow that is fatalized by the poison. Gertrude accidentally drinks the poisoned wine and dies. In his final moments, Laerte reconciles with Hamlet and reveals Claudius' murder plot. Before his death, Hamlet succeeds in killing Claudius and names Fortinbras as his heir. When Fortinbras arrives, Horatio tells the story and Fortinbras orders Hamlet to pay homage.
