Jane Eyre
Charlotte Brontë / pseudonym: Currer Bell


"Jane Eyre" by Charlotte Brontë is a masterpiece of English literature that captivates the reader with its gripping plot, deep characters and passionate love story. The novel tells the story of Jane Eyre, who grows up as an orphan and fights against social injustice and personal adversity before accepting a position as a governess at Thornfield Hall. There she falls in love with her mysterious and opaque employer, Mr. Rochester, and explores the complex nature of love, desire and personal freedom.
Summary
Part One
Orphan Jane Eyre is initially taken in by her aunt, Mrs. Reed, who feels bound by a promise to her deceased husband. But Jane is brought up under her cousins, who mistreat her, especially her cousin John. After a violent altercation with her aunt, which is preceded by a disproportionate punishment and causes Jane to faint, ten-year-old Jane is sent to Lowood boarding school on January 15. There she befriends Helen Burns, a sincere and warm-hearted fellow pupil. Helen, however, succumbs to the miserable conditions of the boarding school and dies of tuberculosis. This story is strongly inspired by the experiences of the author Charlotte Brontë, whose two older sisters Maria and Elizabeth died as children due to the poor living conditions at their school in Cowan Bridge.
After an outbreak of typhoid fever, living conditions at Lowood boarding school improve and it develops into a prestigious institution. After eight years there - six as a pupil and two as a teacher - Jane Eyre decides to change her life. She places an advertisement in the newspaper seeking a position as a tutor. Mrs. Fairfax answers the ad and invites Jane to teach Adèle, the ward of Mr. Rochester, a wealthy 40-year-old owner of Thornfield Hall.
Part two
Over the months, the young governess gets to know her "master", and the admiration she feels for him soon turns into deep and sincere love. She is aware of the difference in age and wealth between them and cannot contain her feelings - even when she believes that he is going to marry someone else: the beautiful and proud Miss Ingram. One day, however, he tells her that despite her age and situation, he has always preferred her and wants to marry her. Jane is too happy to believe in her happiness and is skeptical at first, but when she is convinced of his sincerity, she agrees and the wedding is prepared. On the day of the wedding, however, Jane learns Mr. Rochester's terrible secret at the altar. Since he had married a woman in his youth under the influence of his father and brother who turned out to be insane, he cannot marry anyone else. His first wife, Bertha Mason, is still alive and lives hidden and locked up in the attic of Thornfield-Hall.
Part three
Exhausted, Jane sets off in the night to avoid the temptation of becoming Rochester's mistress. Without money, she wanders for three days through an unfamiliar area before she finds refuge in the Rivers family home, almost dying. She stays there for a month under a false identity (Jane Elliot) and befriends two young women, Mary and Diana, who have been left without a fortune after the death of their father. She also meets their brother, the pastor St. John Rivers. At her request, he finds her a job as a teacher in the village, which enables her to live independently. After a few months, however, he reveals her true identity and tells her that her paternal uncle, who lived on the island of Madeira and whom she had never met, had died and left her a rich inheritance. She also learns that she was a much-loved child of her mother and father and that the Rivers are in fact her paternal cousins. She is only too happy to have finally found a loving family and decides to share her inheritance with her cousins.
Living in the family home with Mary, Diana and St. John, she gradually befriends her cousin, who exerts a strong influence on her. He has a calling to become a missionary and offers her the chance to accompany him to India and become his wife. It is not love that guides his proposal, but his religious sense of duty and his respect for Jane's courage and intelligence. Although she has only fraternal feelings for St. John, she is on the verge of accepting the proposal.
One night, she hears a voice calling to her out of nowhere: she returns to Thornfield to find out about Mr. Rochester's well-being, of whom she has heard nothing despite several letters to Mrs. Fairfax, the estate's caretaker.
But instead of the familiar estate, she finds only ruins. The landlord tells her that the house was destroyed by fire shortly after she left. The cause was Mr. Rochester's mentally ill wife, who had already attempted to set fire to the house in the past. She died when she threw herself from the roof. Mr. Rochester was seriously injured in the rescue attempt of his wife and other occupants, losing his sight and a hand. He now lives in seclusion in Ferndean, together with his servants John and his wife. Jane visits him immediately and still loves him despite his even more sinister appearance.
A humiliated man, Rochester vows to lead a purer life and reveals that he has longed intensely for Jane since she left. He had even shouted her name one night in desperation (the call she heard from the Rivers' house) and he heard her reply from miles away, highlighting the connection between them. Jane declares herself a financially independent woman and assures him of her love, affirming that she will never leave him. Rochester proposes to her again and they marry. The couple lives happily together at "Ferndean Manor" - an old house in the woods, and has contact with Adèle, who grows up, and Diana and Mary, who both find loving husbands. St. John moves to India to carry out his missionary aims, but it is implied that he is seriously ill there. Rochester regains the sight in one eye two years after his and Jane's marriage, allowing him to see their newborn son.
