Journey to the Center of the Earth
Jules Verne


"Journey to the Center of the Earth" by Jules Verne is a groundbreaking novel of science fiction and adventure literature. This work tells the fascinating story of Professor Otto Lidenbrock, his nephew Axel and their guide Hans, who undertake an expedition to the center of the earth based on the decipherment of an ancient runic script they find in an old book. The story combines scientific exploration with the adventurous elements of an unknown world beneath the earth's surface.
Summary
Hamburg, May 24, 1863: Professor Lidenbrock returns home with an extremely valuable book in Icelandic by an author from the 12th century. While he is discussing it with his nephew Axel, a parchment slips out of the book; on it is a cryptogram in runic script, which the two of them know how to interpret. In the translation appears the name of the 16th century Icelandic scientist Arne Saknussemm with instructions on how to accomplish the feat he achieved: a journey to the center of the earth. The professor and Axel decide to travel to Iceland to repeat the feat.
They arrive in Reykjavík on June 10 and are hosted for a few days by Mr. Fridriksson, a scientist; Professor Lidenbrock takes the opportunity to research the life of Arne Saknussemm, but can find nothing of his work. Fridriksson introduces him to Hans, an Icelandic guide who is to accompany them to the foot of Sneffels, the volcano which, according to the cryptogram, leads to the center of the earth.
After about eight days of walking, they reach the now extinct crater of the volcano and enter it, where the professor finds an inscription: "Arne Saknussemm", proof that the scientist has indeed explored the interior of the earth. This is when their real journey begins. First they descend into a vertical well and come to a fork in the road: unfortunately, they choose the wrong route and have to turn back, losing several days in the process. Water begins to run out, but thanks to Hans they find a stream that will accompany them throughout their expedition. On August 7, something very strange happens: Axel, who was leading the group, finds himself alone and without the stream; he feels lost and faints several times in despair. After a few hours, he hears his uncle calling him and sets off to find him; however, he ends up in a long tunnel, which fortunately leads him into the arms of Hans.
After a day's rest, Axel wakes up to find a huge lake in front of him, on whose shores they find giant mushrooms and gigantic bones; they begin to sail on the lake on a raft; unknown animals live in it, including an ichthyosaur and a plesiosaur, which they observe fighting. After a few quiet days exploring an island, they are caught in the middle of a hurricane that sweeps them away. When they come to, they realize that they are near a coast that is actually not that far from where they started. Professor Lidenbrock and Axel explore the area while Hans repairs the raft. Under their feet they find hundreds of bones and even a skull and the skeleton of a human from the Quaternary period; Professor Lidenbrock is the first to make such a find. Nephew and uncle then venture into a forest with primitive vegetation from the Tertiary period, in the depths of which they are astonished to find a prehistoric humanoid more than three meters tall watching over a herd of mastodons. Axel doubts whether he really saw the creature and gets into a discussion with Lidenbrock about whether it was a human with ape-like features or an ape with human-like features. Worried that the creature might be hostile, they decide to leave the forest quickly.
Then Axel finds a knife with two initials: A. S.; Arne Saknussemm has actually led them step by step, and they set off in search of a crevice between the granite rocks. They find a rock ledge with Arne Saknussemm's name engraved on it, and after calling Hans, the three set off again, but are stopped by a boulder in the middle of a tunnel; they decide to blow it up with gunpowder, but a chasm forms into which all the water of the lake pours. All three find themselves in the darkness of a long abyss and, no longer able to steer their boat, they allow themselves to be swept away by the great volume of water. At some point, Professor Lidenbrock realizes that they are no longer sinking, but rising into the side channel of a volcano; to everyone's horror, there is no longer water under their raft, but glowing lava. It is August 29th, and after more than two months they leave the depths of the earth and return to the surface with the magma. They land on the island of Stromboli, at the foot of the volcano.
