Lolita
Vladimir Nabokov


"Lolita" by Vladimir Nabokov is a novel that is often perceived as challenging and disturbing due to its controversial subject matter and provocative narrative style. The book tells the story of Humbert Humbert, a sophisticated, witty middle-aged man who develops an obsessive and pedophilic relationship with a twelve-year-old girl named Dolores Haze, whom he affectionately and trivially calls "Lolita". Nabokov's work is a complex study of manipulation, obsession and the dark depths of the human soul.
Summary
The novel is preceded by a fictitious foreword by John Ray Jr, an editor of psychology books. Ray explains that he is presenting the memoirs of a man with the pseudonym "Humbert Humbert" who recently died of heart disease while in prison awaiting a murder trial. The memoir, which addresses the audience as his jurors, begins with Humbert's birth in Paris in 1910 to an English mother and Swiss father. He spends his childhood on the French Riviera, where he falls in love with his girlfriend Annabel Leigh. This youthful and physically unfulfilled love is interrupted by Annabel's premature death from typhus, which causes Humbert to become sexually obsessed with a certain type of girl between the ages of 9 and 14, whom he refers to as " nymphets ".
After graduating, Humbert works as a teacher of French literature and begins publishing an academic literature textbook, referring in passing to repeated stays in psychiatric institutions during this time. Before the outbreak of the Second World War, Humbert emigrated to America.In 1947, he relocated to Ramsdale, a quiet New England town, where he found the tranquility needed to continue his writing. The house he intended to live in was destroyed in a fire. While searching for a new home, he meets the widow Charlotte Haze, who is looking for a tenant. Humbert stops by Charlotte's apartment as a courtesy and initially plans to decline her offer. However, Charlotte leads Humbert into her garden, where her 12-year-old daughter Dolores (also called Dolly, Lo and Lola) is sunbathing. Humbert sees Dolores, whom he calls Lolita, as the perfect nymphet and the embodiment of his old love Annabel, and decides without further ado to move in with her.
The passionate Humbert is constantly looking for discreet ways to satisfy his sexual desires, usually through the slightest physical contact with Dolores. When she is sent to summer camp, Humbert receives a letter from Charlotte, who confesses her love for him and gives him an ultimatum: Either he marries her or he moves out immediately. After some initial horror, Humbert recognizes the appeal of being Dolores' stepfather and marries Charlotte for instrumental reasons. Charlotte later discovers his diary, in which she learns of his desire for her daughter and his loathing of Charlotte. Shocked and humiliated, Charlotte decides to flee and writes letters to her friends to warn them about Humbert. She doesn't believe him that the diary is just a sketch for a future novel and runs out of the house to post the letters, but is hit by a car and killed.
Humbert destroys the letters and takes Dolores out of the camp, claiming that her mother is seriously ill and has been hospitalized. He then takes her to a luxury hotel that Charlotte had previously recommended to him. Humbert knows he will feel guilty if he has sex with Dolores while she is conscious and tricks her into taking a sedative by claiming it is a vitamin. While waiting for the pill to take effect, he strolls through the hotel and meets a mysterious man who seems to know about Humbert's plan with Dolores. Humbert avoids the conversation and returns to his hotel room. There he realizes that he has been fobbed off with a milder drug, because Dolores is only drowsy and keeps waking up, falling back to sleep again and again. He doesn't dare have sexual contact with her that night.
The next morning, Dolores reveals to Humbert that she had engaged in sexual activity with an older boy at another camp a year earlier. A sexual relationship between the two begins when Dolores proposes to Humbert. After they leave the hotel, Humbert reveals to Dolores that her mother is dead.
The news is devastating for Dolores and she cries often over the next few days. The two travel across the country, driving all day and staying in motels. Humbert becomes increasingly desperate to keep Dolores interested in traveling—and in him—offering her bribes in return for sexual favors. Eventually they settle in Beardsley, a small town in New England. Humbert assumes the role of Dolores' father and enrolls her in a local private school for girls.
Humbert jealously and strictly controls all of Dolores' social gatherings and forbids her to go on dates and attend parties. It is only at the instigation of the principal, who considers Humbert to be a strict and conservative European parent, that he agrees to Dolores' participation in the school play, whose title is the same as that of the hotel where Humbert met the mysterious man. Following an argument with Humbert, Dolores leaves the house the day before the play's premiere. He runs after her and finds her in a nearby drugstore, where she is drinking an iced lemonade.
She then tells him that she wants to leave the city for another road trip. Humbert is delighted at first, but becomes increasingly suspicious during the trip. He has the feeling that he is being followed by someone Dolores knows.
The man who is following her is Clare Quilty - a famous playwright who wrote the play Dolores was supposed to be in. In the mountains of Colorado, Dolores falls ill. Humbert takes her to a local hospital, from where she is taken away one night by her "uncle". Aware that she has no living relatives, Humbert embarks on a frantic quest to find Dolores and her abductor, though his initial efforts are fruitless. Over the next two years, Humbert keeps his head above water with a young alcoholic named Rita in a moderately functioning relationship.
Deeply depressed, Humbert unexpectedly receives a letter from 17-year-old Dolores, who informs him that she is married and pregnant and desperately needs money. Armed with a pistol, Humbert forcefully traces her address against her wishes. At Dolores' request, he pretends to be her estranged father and conceals the details of their previous relationship from her husband Richard. Dolores reveals to Humbert that Quilty kidnapped her from the hospital: she was in love with Quilty, but he rejected her when she refused to act in one of his pornographic films. Humbert claims to the reader that he realized at that moment that he was in love with Dolores all along. Humbert begs her to go with him, but she refuses. Humbert accepts her decision and gives her the money she is entitled to from her inheritance. Humbert then goes to the drug-addicted Quilty and shoots him.
Shortly afterwards, Humbert is arrested. In his final words, he reaffirms his love for Dolores and asks that his memoirs only be published after her death. Dolores dies giving birth to her child on Christmas Day 1952, disproving Humbert's prediction that Dolly would probably outlive him by many years.
