Lord of the Flies
William Golding


"Lord of the Flies" by William Golding is a compelling and insightful novel that delves into the darker sides of human nature, told through the story of British schoolboys stranded on a deserted island following a plane crash. Initially, the boys attempt to build a democratic society, but their efforts soon disintegrate into chaos and violence. Golding's work is a harrowing examination of civilization and its abysses, power, and the inherent sadism in man.
Summary
In the midst of a wartime evacuation, a British plane crashes on a remote island in the Pacific Ocean. The only survivors are middle-aged or pre-pubescent boys. A blond boy named Ralph and a fat boy named Piggy find a conch shell, which Ralph uses as a horn to gather the survivors in one place. Using the conch shell, Ralph immediately takes charge of the other boys and is elected their "chief". He sets out three main guidelines: have fun, ensure their own survival and constantly maintain a smoke signal to alert any passing ships to their presence. Ralph joins a red-haired boy named Jack and a quiet boy named Simon and uses Piggy's glasses to start a signal fire.
The appearance of order worsens when the majority of the boys become inactive and ignore Ralph's efforts to improve their lives on the island. They develop paranoia about an imaginary monster they believe exists on the island. Ralph is unable to persuade the boys that the monster isn't real, while Jack's popularity increases as he vows to personally hunt and kill the monster. At one point, Jack calls many of the boys together to hunt a wild boar, which distracts those who are supposed to maintain the signal fire. The smoke signal goes out without attracting a ship passing by the island. Ralph confronts Jack angrily about his neglect of the signal, but the other boys dismiss his concerns. Ralph is disillusioned with his role as leader and considers resigning his post, but is dissuaded by Piggy.
One night, there is a dogfight near the island while the boys are asleep, during which a fighter pilot jumps out of his plane and dies in the descent. His body drifts onto the island with his parachute and becomes entangled in a tree. Twin boys Sam and Eric see the pilot's body and think it is the monster. When Ralph, Jack and a gloomy boy named Roger later examine the body, they flee, mistakenly believing the monster to be real. Jack calls a meeting and tries to turn the others against Ralph, but initially receives no support; he storms off alone to form his own tribe, and most of the other boys gradually join him.
Simon often retreats to the island's forest to be alone. One day when he is there, Jack and his followers erect a sacrifice to the monster nearby: a pig's head sitting on a sharpened stick with flies buzzing around it. Simon enters into an imaginary conversation with the head, which he refers to as the "Lord of the Flies". The head tells Simon that there is no monster on the island and predicts that the other boys will turn against him. That night, Ralph and Piggy visit Jack's tribe and learn that they have begun to paint their faces and perform primitive ritual dances. Simon discovers that the monster is the dead pilot and rushes down to inform Jack's tribe. The angry boys, including Ralph and Piggy, mistake Simon for the monster and beat him to death.
Jack and his band of rebels decide to steal Piggy's glasses, the only means by which the boys can start a fire. They raid Ralph's camp, take the glasses and return to their mountain camp on a rocky outcrop called Castle Rock. Abandoned by most of his followers, Ralph travels to Castle Rock with Piggy, Sam and Eric to confront Jack and retrieve the glasses. The boys reject Ralph, with Roger setting off a trap that kills Piggy and shatters the conch shell. Ralph manages to escape, but Sam and Eric are tortured by Roger until they join Jack's tribe.
That night, Ralph secretly confronts Sam and Eric, who warn him that Jack wants to hunt him down. The next morning, Jack's tribe sets fire to the forest and Ralph narrowly escapes the hunters. After a long chase, Ralph stumbles and falls in front of an adult in uniform - a British naval officer whose squad has landed to investigate the fire. Ralph, Jack and the other boys burst into sobs. The officer expresses his disappointment that the boys are exhibiting such wild, belligerent behavior before turning to stare at his cruiser waiting offshore.
