Momo
Michael Ende


"Momo" by Michael Ende is a literary work that combines fantasy elements with profound philosophical reflections and transports the reader into a magical world. The story revolves around a little girl called Momo, who lives in a gray town and has the extraordinary ability to listen to people and give them time. She fights against the Men in Grey, mysterious beings who steal people's time. This timeless novel explores the meaning of time, friendship and humanity in an increasingly hectic world.
Summary
In an imaginative world, in a vast city of sprawling new neighborhoods, Momo lives in a dilapidated amphitheater. Momo, a little girl with unkempt, dark curls and pitch-black eyes, often walks around barefoot because her two unsuitable shoes are too big for her. She always wears old, colorfully patched clothes, consisting of a long patchwork skirt and an oversized men's jacket. Despite her poverty, Momo has a unique ability: she is an exceptionally good listener. Her gift means that people who tell her their worries suddenly feel liberated and are filled with new ideas and rediscovered joy, allowing them to express their hidden thoughts and feelings in vivid words. This makes Momo an indispensable advisor for everyone. Her attentive listening also encourages creativity, which is particularly evident in the children, who can now play more imaginatively. Since Momo has been in his life, the storyteller Gigi can also make his tales much more gripping and captivating. Even the old street sweeper Beppo, who gathers many impressions during his work, finds in Momo someone who listens to him and understands him without declaring him mad.
One day, the Men in Grey appear. These bald-headed agents of the Timesavings Bank, dressed in ash-grey robes and always smoking a cigar of the same color, persuade people to "save" their time and supposedly store it safely and with interest for later. In reality, however, this robs people of their time. Driven by the desire to save time, they forget to enjoy the here and now and appreciate the finer things in life.
Momo, who senses the onset of the coldness caused by saving time, uses her extraordinary gift of listening to open people's eyes and reveal the true consequences of saving time. In doing so, she disrupts the plans of the Men in Grey, who then become aware of her. One of the agents visits Momo and tries to distract her from her friends with a toy doll so that she forgets about them. But Momo rejects the doll because she cannot show love to an inanimate object. Her question to the agent as to whether anyone loves him shakes him to such an extent that he reveals the dark secret of the Timesavings Bank to Momo. When he realizes what consequences his confession could have, he urges Momo to forget the secret and flees.
Determined to spread the truth, Momo shares everything with her friends Beppo and Gigi. Together they decide to warn the entire town of the threat posed by the Men in Grey. They organize a demonstration with the town's children to inform the citizens about the dangers.
The Men in Grey prevent the adults from listening to the children. After sentencing the traitorous agent BLW/553/c to a garbage dump and executing him by depriving him of all his time, they decide to capture Momo and rush to the amphitheater. Beppo, who happened to be watching the trial, also rushes to the amphitheater to warn Momo, but arrives too late. The Men in Grey also arrive too late, as Momo has just been visited by the tortoise Cassiopeia, who has taken her away. The gray men search the whole city for Momo, but don't find her because Cassiopeia has the ability to see half an hour into the future and therefore knows how to evade the pursuers.
Cassiopeia leads Momo to the mysterious administrator of Time, Master Secundus Minutus Hora (Master Hora), who lives in the Nowhere House outside of time. This house can only be reached by walking backwards through a magical alley to the Nowhere House, where time flows out of the visitor. In the area surrounding the Nowhere House, you have to move slowly to make faster progress. Master Hora reveals the secret of time to Momo, explains how it is created and reveals that the Men in Grey need the time saved by humans, which they "smoke" in their cigars, in order to survive.
After Momo decides to inform her friends about her findings, Master Hora sends her back to the city. But a lot of time has passed during her absence and everything has changed. Momo can no longer find a place among her friends, as the Men in Grey have isolated her. Finally, the Men in Grey ask Momo to lead them to Master Hora so that he can give them all the time the humans have saved up. Momo refuses, however, especially as she does not know the way to Master Hora without the help of Cassiopeia. Just then, Cassiopeia appears and leads them to Master Hora again. The Men in Grey follow them and try to enter the Nowhere House, but fail. As they pass through the magical alley, time flows out of the Men in Grey, who consist entirely of stolen time, and they dissolve.
In a world that is now almost completely under the control of the Men in Grey, the wise Master Hora decides to act. He puts himself to sleep, freezing time and bringing everything to a standstill. With the exception of the Men in Grey, only Cassiopeia and Momo, to whom Master Hora has previously given a magical flower, are able to move for an hour. Their mission is to lure the seemingly overpowering gray lords into a trap. When the Men in Grey realize that time is standing still, they flee to their headquarters, followed by Momo and Cassiopeia. There, the Men in Grey store the magical flowers made from stolen time in a refrigerated room, the door of which was accidentally left open when Master Hora fell asleep. In desperation, the gray lords reduce their number to six with a coin toss in order to survive longer with the remaining supplies of the magical flowers.
Momo uses her magical flower to secretly lock the storeroom, cutting the Men in Grey off from their supplies. In their panic, they fight for the last cigars, but lose them and finally disband. Momo uses her magical flower to open the storeroom and enters. As there are no more Men in Grey, the magical flowers thaw. They carry Momo outside as if on a flying carpet and return to the people to whom they originally belonged.
Momo is finally reunited with her friends and Cassiopeia returns to Master Hora, who awakens from his sleep with the thawing of the magical flowers.
