Oliver Twist
Charles Dickens


"Oliver Twist; or, The Parish Boy's Progress" by Charles Dickens is a masterpiece of English literature and one of the most famous and influential novels of the 19th century. The work tells the harrowing story of Oliver, an orphan boy who grows up in a poorhouse and is drawn into London's dark underworld. Despite the grim circumstances and the cruelty to which he is subjected, Oliver retains his innocence and goodness, a contrast that forms the heart of the book. Dickens uses Oliver's story to denounce the social ills of his time, in particular the exploitation of children, the corruption within society and the failure of social institutions.
Summary
Oliver Twist is born in the fictional town of Mudfog into a world of misery and hardship. He spends his childhood in bitter poverty and is brought up in a workhouse. The children who work there are given very little to eat; after six months, a lot is drawn and the loser asks for another portion of gruel. Oliver is chosen, and so he turns to the head of the workhouse, Mr. Bumble, and humbly asks for another portion. This supposed act of rebellion causes a great uproar.
Oliver is expelled from the workhouse and placed in the service of the undertaker Mr. Sowerberry. One day, the jealous fellow apprentice Noah Claypole insults Oliver's mother and a furious physical altercation ensues. Oliver flees to London to find a better life.
Oliver meets a young man named Jack Dawkins (the Artful Dodger), who offers him food and lodging and takes him to a notorious criminal named Fagin, who trains orphan boys to become petty thieves. Oliver begins Fagin's training, unaware of what he has let himself in for. However, when he goes out with Dawkins and another boy and sees them stealing a handkerchief from an old gentleman named Mr. Brownlow, he realizes the truth. While Dawkins and the other boy flee, Oliver is pursued, arrested and brought before Judge Fang. Brownlow stands up for Oliver, takes him home and looks after him. While Oliver is recovering from his ordeal, Brownlow and his housekeeper notice that Oliver bears a striking resemblance to a woman in a painting hanging in Brownlow's residence.
Worried that Oliver might incriminate his gang, Fagin hires a young woman named Nancy and her violent lover, the thief Bill Sikes, to kidnap Oliver and bring him back to his lair. Fagin forces him to take part in a burglary planned by Sikes. The burglary goes wrong; while Sikes escapes, Oliver, after being wounded, ends up in the care of the people he was supposed to rob: Miss Rose and her guardian Mrs. Maylie.
A mysterious man known only as "Monks" teams up with Fagin to prevent Oliver from finding out about his past. Monks bribes Mr. Bumble and his new wife, the former widow Corney, to get information about Oliver. Together they dispose of a ring and a locket that once belonged to Oliver's mother and were stolen from her after her death. Nancy, wracked with guilt over her role in Oliver's abduction, spies on them in secret and passes the information on to Mrs. Maylie, who tells Mr. Brownlow. Meanwhile, Dawkins is arrested for pickpocketing, tried and sentenced to deportation to Australia.
Noah Claypole, who had fled to London with Charlotte, the Sowerberrys' maid, after robbing Mr. Sowerberry, joins Fagin's gang. On Fagin's instructions, he follows Nancy and discovers that she meets regularly with the Brownlows and Maylies to ensure Oliver's welfare. Fagin fears that Nancy has betrayed him and Sikes and tells his suspicions to Sikes, who beats Nancy to death in a fit of rage and goes into hiding. He is recognized by an angry mob and tries to escape. When he goes to Fagin's hideout, he learns that Fagin has been arrested. When the mob reaches him, he attempts to flee across the rooftops by swinging on a rope. But as he tries to loop the rope around him, he is startled by a vision of the dead Nancy's staring eyes, causing him to lose his balance. As he falls, the rope falls around his neck and hangs him up.
Mr. Brownlow has Monks arrested and forces him to reveal his secrets: He is really Oliver's half-brother and had hoped to appropriate Oliver's half of the rightful inheritance.
Brownlow asks Oliver to give Monks half of his inheritance and give him a second chance, to which Oliver happily agrees. Monks emigrates to America, but squanders his money, relapses and dies in prison. Fagin is arrested and sentenced to death by hanging. Oliver and Mr. Brownlow visit him in prison the day before his execution and find out where the documents proving Oliver's identity are. Bumble and his wife are dismissed from their jobs and end up as inmates in the workhouse. Rose Maylie, who turns out to be Oliver's maternal aunt, marries and enjoys a long life. Oliver lives happily with Mr. Brownlow as his adopted son.
