One Hundred Years of Solitude
Gabriel García Márquez


"One Hundred Years of Solitude" by Gabriel García Márquez, first published in 1967, is a fundamental novel of magical realism and one of the most important works of Latin American literature. The novel tells the story of the Buendía family over six generations in the fictional town of Macondo, which was founded by José Arcadio Buendía and his wife Úrsula Iguarán - a story full of love, passion, tragedy and loneliness. García Márquez combines real historical events with magical elements in his work, offering the reader a rich and multi-layered literary experience.
Summary
The village of Macondo is founded by several families, led by José Arcadio Buendia and Ursula Iguarán, a pair of cousins who marry despite fears and anxieties about their blood relationship and the myth in the region that their offspring could be born with a pig's tail. They have three children: José Arcadio, Aureliano and Amaranta (first names that will be repeated in the following generations). José Arcadio, the founder, is the person who will lead and investigate the innovations that the gypsies bring to the village. He will end his life tied to a tree, to which the spirit of his enemy Prudencio Aguilar will come, with whom he will have a dialog. Ursula is the matriarch of the family, who lives for over a hundred years and takes care of the family and the home.
The village grows little by little and with this growth come the inhabitants from the other side of the swamp (the terrain that surrounds the village and shields it from the outside world, as is the case with the Colombian city of Aracataca). With them, trade and construction developed in Macondo. Unfortunately, the plague of sleeplessness and the plague of forgetfulness also emerged. The loss of memory forces the inhabitants to invent a method of remembering things, and Aureliano begins labeling all objects to remember their names; however, this method begins to fail when the characters forget how to read. Until one day, Melquiades (the leader of the gypsies and friend of José Arcadio) returns with a drink that is supposed to restore their memories immediately. In return, he is invited to live in the house.
When the civil war breaks out, the population takes an active part in the conflict by sending a resistance army under the leadership of Colonel Aureliano Buendía (José Arcadio's second son) to fight against the conservative regime. Meanwhile, in the village, Arcadio (grandson of the founder and son of Pilar Ternera and José Arcadio) is appointed civil and military leader by his uncle and develops into a brutal dictator who is shot when conservatism returns to power.
The war continues and the colonel's life is saved on several occasions until one day he tires of the pointless fighting and signs a peace treaty that will last until the end of the novel. After signing the treaty, Aureliano shoots himself in the chest but survives. He later returns home, turns his back on politics and devotes himself to making small golden fish, locked away in his workshop, which he only leaves to sell them.
Aureliano Triste, one of Colonel Aureliano Buendia's seventeen children, sets up an ice cream factory in Macondo, leaves the business to his brother Aureliano Centeno and leaves the village with the idea of establishing a train service to Macondo. After a short time, he returns and fulfills his mission, which leads to a major development: the telegraph, the gramophone and the cinema come along with the train. The village becomes a center of activity in the region and attracts thousands of people from different places. Some newly arrived foreigners set up a banana plantation near Macondo. The village flourishes until a strike breaks out on the banana plantation; to end it, the national army rushes in, murders the protesting workers and throws them into the sea.
After the massacre of the workers on the banana plantation, the village is hit by rains that last four years, eleven months and two days. Ursula says that she is waiting for the floods to end so that she can finally die. Aureliano Babilonia, the last member of the Buendia line, is born (at first he was called Aureliano Buendia, until he found out through Melquiades' scrolls that his father's name was Babilonia). When the rain stops, Ursula dies and Macondo is left desolate.
The family is reduced in size and the Buendias are no longer remembered in Macondo; Aureliano devotes himself to deciphering the Melquiades scrolls in his laboratory until his aunt Amaranta Ursula, with whom he is having an affair, returns from Brussels. Amaranta Ursula becomes pregnant and gives birth to a child with a pig's tail; she bleeds to death after giving birth. The desperate Aureliano Babilonia goes out into the village and calls from door to door, but Macondo is a deserted village at this point and he only meets a drunkard who offers him liquor. Aureliano stays to sleep. When he wakes up, he remembers his newborn baby and runs to get it, but when he arrives, he finds that ants are eating it.
Aureliano realizes that the events were foretold in the parchments of Melqui-ades and completes the deciphering of the history of Buendia, which was written in advance. As he reads, he realizes that his own story ends here, and with it the story of Macondo.
