One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest
Ken Kesey


"One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest" by Ken Kesey is a powerful and moving novel set in an Oregon mental institution. The work is particularly noted for its sharp critique of the methods and practices within the 1960s psychiatric system, as well as its larger themes about the nature of freedom and resistance to oppression. The story follows Randle P. McMurphy, a free-spirited convict who intentionally commits himself to a mental institution to avoid prison. There he fights against the authoritarian structures and norms of the institution and inspires his fellow patients to rebellion and self-liberation.
Summary
The book is narrated by "Chief" Bromden, a huge but good-natured half-Indian patient in a psychiatric hospital who pretends to be deaf and mute. Bromden's story focuses mainly on the escapades of the rebellious Randle Patrick McMurphy, who feigns insanity in order to serve his sentence for assault and gambling in hospital rather than prison. The chief administrative nurse, Nurse Ratched, rules the ward with absolute authority and little medical supervision. She is supported by her three nurses on the day shift and her assistant doctors and nurses.
McMurphy is a constant adversary of Nurse Ratched and disrupts the ward's procedures, leading to endless power struggles between the inmate and the nurse. He runs a card table, captains the ward's basketball team, comments on Nurse Ratched's character, instigates the other patients to vote on televising the World Series, and organizes a deep-sea fishing trip where the patients are to be "supervised" by prostitutes. After claiming to be able to lift a heavy control panel in the disused hydrotherapy room ("tub room") and not succeeding, his response of "But at least I tried" gives the men the incentive to try to stand up for themselves rather than allow Nurse Ratched to take control of every aspect of their lives. The Chief opens up to McMurphy and reveals to him one night that he can speak and hear. A violent incident after the fishing trip results in McMurphy and the Chief being sent to electroshock therapy sessions, but this punishment does nothing to curb McMurphy's unbridled behavior.
One night, after bribing the night orderly, McMurphy smuggles two prostitute girlfriends onto the ward with alcohol and breaks into the pharmacy to get codeine cough syrup and unspecified psychiatric drugs. Having noticed on the fishing trip that Billy Bibbit - a shy, boyish patient with a stutter and little experience with women - had a crush on the prostitute named Candy, McMurphy arranged this break-in firstly so that Billy could lose his virginity and, secondly, so that McMurphy and other patients could have an unauthorized party. Although McMurphy agrees to a plan before the end of the night to escape before the morning shift begins, he and the other patients instead fall asleep without cleaning up the group's mess, and the morning staff find the ward in complete disarray. Nurse Ratched finds Billy and the prostitute in her arms, partially clothed, and admonishes him. Billy stands his ground for the first time and answers Nurse Ratched without stuttering. Ratched calmly threatens to tell Billy's mother what she saw. Billy suffers an emotional breakdown, immediately becomes a boy again, and takes his own life by slitting his throat when left alone in the doctor's office. Nurse Ratched blames McMurphy for the loss of Billy's life. Enraged by what she has done to Billy, McMurphy attacks Ratched by ripping open her shirt and attempting to strangle her. McMurphy is physically restrained and transferred to the ward for the disturbed.
Nurse Ratched is unable to work for a week due to her injuries. During this time, many of the patients are either transferred to other wards or leave the hospital for good. When she returns, she is unable to speak and is thus deprived of her most effective means of keeping the men in line. As Bromden, Martini and Scanlon are the only patients on the ward who took part in the boat trip, McMurphy is readmitted. He has undergone a lobotomy and is now in a vegetative state that renders him mute and motionless. Bromden smothers McMurphy with a pillow that night in an act of mercy, before throwing the tub room control panel, which McMurphy was previously unable to lift, through a window and escaping from the hospital, being the one who "flew over the cuckoo's nest".
