Othello
William Shakespeare


"Othello" is one of William Shakespeare's most intense and emotionally stirring dramas. The tragedy tells the story of the Moorish general Othello, who serves in Venice and whose life is destroyed by the malicious intrigues of his ensign Iago. Iago's manipulations lead to Othello falsely accusing his beloved wife Desdemona of adultery and plunging him into a maelstrom of mistrust and violence. The work is a profound study of jealousy, betrayal, racism and the destruction caused by inner demons.
Summary
Act One
Roderigo, a wealthy and dissolute gentleman, expresses his displeasure to his friend Iago, an ensign, that Iago has not told him about the secret marriage between Desdemona, the daughter of Senator Brabantio, and Othello, a Mauritanian general in the Venetian army. Roderigo is enraged because he is in love with Desdemona and has proposed marriage to her through her father, Brabantio.
Iago strongly dislikes Othello because he has promoted a younger man called Cassio. Iago is convinced that Cassio is less capable than he is. In a conversation with Roderigo, Iago announces his plans to exploit Othello in his favor. He persuades Roderigo to wake Brabantio and tell him about his daughter's escape. Meanwhile, Iago sneaks up to Othello and warns him that Brabantio is after him.
Brabantio, provoked by Roderigo, is furious and wants to confront Othello, but he finds Othello's residence full of the Duke of Venice's guards, who prevent any violence. News has reached Venice that the Turks are going to attack Cyprus and Othello is summoned to the senators to advise them. Brabantio feels compelled to accompany Othello to the Duke's residence, where he accuses him of sorcery in order to seduce Desdemona.
Othello defends himself before the Duke of Venice, Brabantio's relatives Ludovico and Gratiano and several senators. Othello explains that although he had been invited to Brabantio's house, Desdemona had fallen in love with him because he had told her sad and captivating stories about his life before Venice and not because of any witchcraft. The Senate is satisfied after Desdemona confirms that she loves Othello, but Brabantio leaves the house saying that Desdemona will betray Othello. Iago, who is still in the room, takes note of Brabantio's remark. In accordance with the Duke's orders, Othello leaves Venice to lead the Venetian troops against the invading Turks on the island of Cyprus. He is accompanied by his newly wedded wife, his newly appointed lieutenant Cassio, his ensign Iago and his wife Emilia, who acts as servant to Desdemona.
Act Two
The group reaches Cyprus and discovers that a storm has destroyed the Turkish fleet. Othello orders a feast and departs to consummate his marriage to Desdemona. While Othello is away, Iago gets Cassio drunk and manipulates Roderigo into involving Cassio in an argument. Montano tries to calm the angry and drunk Cassio. A fight ensues in which Montano is injured. Othello arrives and questions the men about the incident. Othello blames Cassio for the riot and relieves him of his rank. The desperate Cassio is then persuaded by Iago to ask Desdemona to persuade her husband to reinstate him.
Act Three
Iago persuades Othello to distrust the relationship between Cassio and Desdemona. When Desdemona drops a handkerchief (the first gift Othello gave her), Emilia finds it and gives it to Iago at his request, without knowing what he intends to do with it. Othello appears and, having been convinced by Iago of his wife's infidelity with his captain, swears together with Iago to kill Desdemona and Cassio, whereupon he makes Iago his lieutenant.
Act Four
Iago places the handkerchief in Cassio's chamber and instructs Othello to observe Cassio's reactions while Iago interrogates him. Iago gets Cassio to tell him about his affair with Bianca, a local courtesan, but whispers her name so quietly that Othello believes the two men are talking about Desdemona. Later, Bianca accuses Cassio of having given her a gift that he had previously received from another lover. Othello observes this, and Iago persuades him that Desdemona gave the handkerchief to Cassio.
The angry and wounded Othello decides to kill his wife and instructs Iago to kill Cassio. Othello makes life difficult for Desdemona and beats her in front of the Venetian nobles present. Meanwhile, Roderigo complains that he has received nothing from Iago for his money and his efforts on Desdemona's behalf, but Iago persuades him to kill Cassio.
Act Five
Roderigo unsuccessfully attacks Cassio in the street after the latter has left Bianca, while Cassio injures Roderigo. During the scuffle, Iago appears behind Cassio and seriously injures his leg. In the dark, Iago conceals his identity, and upon hearing Cassio's cries for help, he joins Lodovico and Gratiano who rush to the scene. When Cassio identifies Roderigo as one of his attackers, Iago secretly stabs Roderigo to prevent him from revealing the plot. Iago then accuses Bianca of having planned Cassio's murder.
Othello confronts the sleeping Desdemona. She denies having been unfaithful, but he suffocates her. Emilia arrives, Desdemona defends her husband before she dies, and Othello accuses Desdemona of adultery. Emilia calls for help. Montano, the former governor, arrives accompanied by Gratiano and Iago. When Othello mentions the handkerchief as proof, Emilia realizes what Iago has done and exposes him. Othello, who learns too late of Desdemona's innocence, stabs Iago, saying that Iago is a devil, and Iago stabs Emilia in a scuffle.
Iago refuses to explain his motives and swears to remain silent from now on. Lodovico arrests Iago and Othello for the murders of Roderigo, Emilia and Desdemona, but Othello commits suicide. Lodovico names Cassio as Othello's successor and instructs him to mete out just punishment to Iago. He then accuses Iago of his actions and departs to inform the others of the events.
