Perfume
Patrick Süskind


"Perfume: The Story of a Murderer" by Patrick Süskind is a remarkable historical novel set in 18th century France. The work tells the life story of Jean-Baptiste Grenouille, a man with an extraordinary sense of smell, but who has no body odor himself. Grenouille becomes an obsessive and unscrupulous perfumer whose quest for the perfect scent leads him down a dark and deadly path. Süskind's novel is both a gripping character study and a profound exploration of human obsession.
Summary
Part One
In 1738, a boy is born in Paris, France, and is subsequently abandoned. His mother is almost immediately charged with infanticide and subsequently executed. He is baptized "Jean-Baptiste Grenouille" (French for "frog") and placed in a foster family. However, as he is a difficult and reclusive child, he is eventually apprenticed to a tanner. Grenouille has a remarkable sense of smell, which gives him the extraordinary ability to recognize the finest scents from complex mixtures of fragrances and over great distances. This enables him to perform seemingly magical feats, such as identifying bad vegetables, recognizing approaching visitors or navigating in complete darkness.
One day, long after he has memorized almost all the smells of the city, Grenouille is surprised by a unique scent. He finds the source of the odor: a young, virginal girl just entering puberty. Fascinated by her scent and believing that only he can possess it, he strangles her and stays with her body until the scent has left him. In his quest to learn more about the art of perfume making, he is apprenticed to one of the best perfumers in town, Giuseppe Baldini, an ageing, once-great master of his trade who finds himself increasingly outflanked by rival perfumers. Grenouille proves to be a child prodigy by copying and improving the perfume of a competitor in Baldini's laboratory, whereupon Baldini offers him an apprenticeship. Baldini teaches Grenouille the basic techniques of perfumery and sells Grenouille's masterful new formulas as his own, restoring his flagging reputation. Baldini eventually reveals to Grenouille that there are techniques other than distillation that can be used to preserve a wider range of fragrances and that can only be learned in the heartland of perfumery, the Grasse region on the Côte d'Azur. Shortly afterwards, Grenouille decides to leave Paris, and Baldini dies when his store falls into the Seine.
Part Two
On his way to Grasse, Grenouille travels through the countryside and is increasingly disgusted by the smell of people. He shuns civilization and instead lives in a cave inside the Plomb du Cantal, subsisting on the mountain's sparse vegetation and wildlife. However, his peace and quiet comes to an end when, after seven years, he realizes that he himself has no smell: he cannot smell himself and neither can other people, as he finally realizes. He travels to Montpellier and invents the story that he was kidnapped and held captive in a cave for seven years to explain his ugly appearance. He creates a body odor from everyday materials and finds that people believe it is the smell of a human, so he is now accepted by society instead of being shunned.
In Montpellier, he wins the favor of the Marquis de La Taillade-Espinasse, who uses Grenouille to spread his pseudo-scientific theory about the influence of "fluid" energies on human vitality. Grenouille produces perfumes that transform the public's image of him as a wretched "caveman" into a clean and cultivated patrician and help the Marquis' theory to achieve great popularity. When Grenouille sees how easily people can be deceived by a simple scent, his hatred turns to contempt. He realizes that it is in his power to develop scents that are described as "superhuman" and "angelic" and that influence the perception of other people in unexpected ways.
Part Three
When he arrives in Grasse, he offers his help in a small store run by the widowed perfumer Madame Arnulfi and her companion Druot, where he is trained in the art of perfume extraction and preservation by enfleurage. One day, he comes across another irresistible scent that is even more stimulating than that of his first victim. It is again the scent of a young, virginal girl, this time named Laure Richis, the daughter of the town's richest nobleman. This time, Grenouille decides to preserve the scent not only in his memory, but also physically. He begins a campaign to murder teenage girls in order to practice extracting and preserving their overwhelming scent. All his victims are found beaten to death, stripped and depilated. Finally, he kills 24 girls in preparation for the murder of Laure, without ever leaving a trace that would link him to the crimes. The police are baffled and the town becomes hysterical with fear. Laure's father realizes that his daughter must be the killer's real target and secretly takes her to a safe place, but Grenouille follows her trail. As they rest for the night, he breaks into her bedroom, eventually killing her and successfully preserving her scent.
Despite his diligence, the police track down Laure's murderer and the hair and clothes of his previous victims are found in his hut near Grasse. He is quickly apprehended and condemned to death. On the way to his execution in the town's market square, however, Grenouille wears a new perfume that he has made from his victims and which has an overwhelming effect. Although the evidence of his guilt is incontrovertible, the citizens are so taken with him and convinced of his innocence that the judge overturns the sentence and Grenouille is released. Even Laure's father is delighted with the new scent and asks him to adopt him as his son. Soon the crowd is so overwhelmed with lust and excitement that the whole town takes part in a mass orgy that nobody talks about afterwards and only a few can remember exactly what happened. The magistrate reopens the investigation into the murders, which are finally attributed to Druot, who makes a false confession under torture and is later hanged without ceremony. After this, life in Grasse returns to normal.
Part Four
The impact of his perfume reinforces Grenouille's disdain for people, particularly as he recognizes that their adoration for him now, even with this level of control, still fails to satisfy him. He decides to return to Paris to die and, after a long journey, ends up in the fish market where he was born. He approaches a group of criminals gathered in a cemetery and douses himself with the entire bottle of his last perfume. The people are so attracted to him that they snatch parts of his body and eventually tear him to pieces to eat them. The story ends with the people, ashamed of what they have done, admitting that they did it out of "love".
