Pride and Prejudice
Jane Austen


"Pride and Prejudice" is one of Jane Austen's most famous novels and is one of the most important works of English literature. The book captivates the reader with its enchanting love story, subtle humor and spot-on social criticism. The story revolves around Elizabeth Bennet, an intelligent and witty young woman, and her turbulent relationship with Mr. Darcy, a rich and seemingly haughty gentleman. Through a variety of misunderstandings and social intrigues, she and Darcy explore the difficulties of overcoming prejudice and finding true love.
Summary
In the early 19th century, the Bennet family lives on their Longbourn estate near the village of Meryton in Hertfordshire, England. Mrs. Bennet has set herself the goal of marrying off her five daughters in order to secure their future. When the wealthy bachelor Mr. Bingley rents the neighbouring Netherfield estate, Mrs. Bennet hopes to marry him off to one of her daughters.
At a dance, the Bennets are introduced to the visitors from Netherfield, comprising Mr. Bingley, his two sisters, and his closest friend, Mr. Darcy. While Mr. Bingley's cheerful manner quickly wins him sympathy and he sets his eyes on Jane, the eldest Bennet daughter, Mr. Darcy, who is even wealthier than Mr. Bingley, behaves arrogantly and reservedly, which quickly earns him resentment. He refuses to dance with Elizabeth, the second Bennet daughter, because he does not consider her beautiful enough. This offends Elizabeth, even though she shrugs it off. Despite his disapproval, Mr. Darcy becomes attracted to Elizabeth over time and begins to admire her acumen and authenticity.
Mr. Collins, the prospective heir to Longbourn, comes to visit to find a bride among the Bennet sisters on the recommendation of Lady Catherine de Bourgh, who also turns out to be Mr. Darcy's aunt. He proposes to Elizabeth. At the same time, the Bennet family meets the charismatic officer George Wickham, who secretly tells Elizabeth how badly Mr. Darcy has treated him. Due to her bias against Mr. Darcy, Elizabeth believes him immediately.
At a social ball, Elizabeth dances with Mr. Darcy while her mother, Mrs. Bennet, openly expresses her expectation that Jane and Bingley will soon be engaged. Meanwhile, Elizabeth rejects a proposal of marriage from Mr. Collins, which angers her mother but relieves her father. Mr. Collins then turns to Elizabeth's friend Charlotte Lucas, who accepts his proposal. Mr. Darcy, who has overheard Mrs. Bennet's comments at the ball and does not approve of the possible union, accompanies Mr. Bingley to London. With the support of his sisters, he persuades Bingley not to return to Netherfield. Jane is heartbroken by Mr. Bingley's departure and seeks solace with her relatives in London, while Elizabeth increasingly blames Mr. Darcy for causing the separation between Jane and Bingley.
In the spring, Elizabeth travels to visit Charlotte and Mr. Collins in Kent. During their stay, they are invited to Lady Catherine's estate, Rosings Park. There Elizabeth meets Mr. Darcy and his cousin, Colonel Fitzwilliam. In conversation, Fitzwilliam reveals that Mr. Darcy saved a friend from an unhappy marriage, and Elizabeth realizes that it is Bingley and Jane. Surprisingly, Mr. Darcy proposes to Elizabeth and confesses his love, regardless of her low social standing. Elizabeth is shocked, as she had no idea of his feelings, and angrily rejects him. She confronts him about his actions that made Jane unhappy and accuses him of mistreating Wickham. Mr. Darcy responds with a certain haughtiness, confirming that he has separated Jane and Bingley and dismissing Wickham's accusations with sarcasm, without directly justifying himself.
The following day, Mr. Darcy presents Elizabeth with a letter. In it, he explains that Wickham, Darcy's father's godson, has turned down a position in life that his father had intended for him and has instead accepted a monetary payment. Wickham quickly blew through this money and then tried to run away with Darcy's 15-year-old sister Georgiana, lured by her substantial dowry. Furthermore, Mr. Darcy explains in the letter that he dissuaded Bingley from marrying Jane because he considered her feelings for Bingley to be indifferent and he felt her family's behavior to be indecent. After reading the letter, Elizabeth feels ashamed of her family's behavior and realizes that her own prejudices against Mr. Darcy were unjustified.
A few months later, Elizabeth accompanies her relatives, the Gardiners, on a tour of Derbyshire. They visit Pemberley, Mr. Darcy's country estate. On Darcy's unexpected return, he proves to be extremely obliging to Elizabeth and the Gardiners. Elizabeth is astonished by this change in Darcy's manners and begins to change her mind about him; she even regrets her rejection of his marriage proposal. During her visit, she learns that her sister Lydia has eloped with Wickham, informs Mr. Darcy of this and leaves hastily. After an unsettling time, Wickham agrees to marry Lydia. During a visit, Lydia reveals that Mr. Darcy was present at her wedding. Mrs. Gardiner feels compelled to reveal to Elizabeth that it was Mr. Darcy who made the marriage possible at considerable expense.
Later, Mr. Bingley and Mr. Darcy return to Netherfield, and Jane accepts Mr. Bingley's proposal of marriage. Lady Catherine, alarmed by the rumor of an impending marriage between Elizabeth and Darcy, seeks out Elizabeth and demands that she promise never to accept Darcy's proposal, as a union between Darcy and her daughter Anne has already been arranged by their mothers.
Elizabeth, who is particularly insistent in this conversation about her claim to personal happiness, reacts confidently and unimpressed by Lady de Bourgh's traditional way of life. Lady Catherine, however, does not let up, visits her nephew in London and tells him indignantly of Elizabeth's bold resistance. This gives Darcy new hope regarding Elizabeth's feelings for him and he pays her a visit at Longbourn. He asks Elizabeth to marry him again, and this time she accepts.
