Romeo and Juliet
William Shakespeare


"Romeo and Juliet is one of William Shakespeare's most famous works. This drama tells the tragic story of two young lovers whose deaths tragically end the feud between their feuding families, the Montagues and the Capulets. The play is a fundamental text in Western literature and has engraved the theme of forbidden love deep into the cultural consciousness.
Summary
The drama unfolds in Verona and begins with an altercation in the street between the servants of the feuding Montague and Capulet families. Prince Escalus of Verona intervenes and warns that future unrest will be punished with death. Count Paris talks to Capulet about marrying his daughter Juliet, but Capulet asks him to wait two years and invites Paris to an upcoming ball. Lady Capulet and Juliet's nurse urge Juliet to consider Paris' advances.
Meanwhile, Benvolio speaks to his cousin Romeo, the Montagues' son, about Romeo's continuing dejection. He finds out that Romeo's grief is caused by an unrequited love for Rosaline, a niece of the Capulets. Benvolio and Mercu-tio convince Romeo to go to the Capulet ball undetected in order to see Rosaline. There, however, Romeo meets Juliet and immediately falls in love with her. Juliet's cousin Tybalt recognizes Romeo and is furious that he has sneaked in, but is prevented from attacking Romeo by Juliet's father, who does not want bloodshed in his house. After the party, Romeo secretly goes to the Capulets' orchard, where he overhears Juliet confessing her love for him from her window, despite her family's hostility to the Montagues. Romeo reveals his presence and the two decide to marry. The following day, they marry in secret with the support of Friar Laurence, who hopes that this union will reconcile the hostile families.
Tybalt, still angry that Romeo has sneaked into the Capulet ball without permission, challenges him to a duel. As Romeo now sees Tybalt as a member of the family, he refuses to fight. Mercutio, outraged by Tybalt's challenge and Romeo's refusal, takes Romeo's place in the duel. When Romeo tries to settle the dispute, Mercutio is mortally wounded and curses both families with his last words. Overwhelmed by grief and guilt, Romeo confronts Tybalt and kills him.
Benvolio defends Romeo's act as just retribution for Mercutio's death. The prince, who has himself lost a relative as a result of the conflict between the families, forbids Romeo to return to Verona under threat of death. Romeo spends one last night in secret with Juliet while they consummate their marriage. In the meantime, Capulet misinterprets Juliet's grief and agrees to a marriage between her and Count Paris. He threatens to disown her if she refuses to marry Paris.
In desperation, Juliet turns to Friar Lorenzo, who gives her a potion that puts her in a deathlike state for 42 hours. Lorenzo promises to send a messenger to inform Romeo of Juliet's apparent death so that he can return as soon as she wakes up. On the eve of her planned wedding, she drinks the potion and is found, presumed dead, in the family crypt.
The messenger who was supposed to inform Romeo of Juliet's condition does not reach him. Instead, Romeo hears of Juliet's supposed death through his servant Balthasar. Deeply saddened, he buys poison from an apothecary and hurries to the Capulet family crypt. There he meets Paris, who is in private mourning for Juliet. Paris, mistaking Romeo for a vandal, confronts him and is killed by Romeo in the ensuing fight. Assuming that Juliet is dead, Romeo takes the poison. When Juliet wakes up and realizes that Romeo is dead, she takes her own life with Romeo's dagger.
The feuding families and Prince Escalus gather at the grave in the face of the tragedy and discover the bodies of the lovers and Paris. Friar Laurence reveals the whole story of the forbidden love, which confirms the curse pronounced by Mercutio. Moved by their shared pain, the families make peace and decide to end their long-standing enmity.
