Steppenwolf
Hermann Hesse / pseudonym: Emil Sinclair


"Steppenwolf" by Hermann Hesse is a profound and complex novel that describes the inner turmoil and search for self-realization of the protagonist Harry Haller. Haller, who describes himself as a "steppe wolf", feels alienated in bourgeois society and struggles with his dual nature, which exhibits both human and animal traits. The book is a profound exploration of identity, loneliness and the search for meaning.
Summary
The protagonist Harry Haller (an alter ego of Hesse, with whom he shares the initials H.H. of his name) is an intellectual in his fifties who, after a brilliant career in the broad fields of poetry, music and philosophy - especially Nietzsche - has suffered several blows of fate: once he lost his reputation and his fortune, another time his wife went mad and left him alone.
After that, he concentrates more and more on his work until he gradually loses the joy of it: Harry's idea of happiness is defined and determined by those brief moments when bliss, ecstasy and the experience of sublimity that he experiences through poetry and music come together: then he sees God at work. He longs to rediscover this divine trace that he had forgotten, if not destroyed, in the bourgeois order surrounding him. He tries to search for this "divine world" in his life, but fails because of the struggle between the two opposing parts of his soul.
Harry then experiences himself as a "steppe wolf", a being made up of a dual nature: he is both a man (a citizen who has studied, entered the workforce and accumulated money in the bank, who wears civilian clothes, who has "normal" desires and lives by compromise) and a wolf (skeptic, loner, asocial and highly critical of so-called bourgeois culture, outsider in politics and revolutionary). This is the contrast between spirit and instinct. Harry discovers that his whole existence is an impossible combination of these two extremes.
This is well explained in a manuscript he left in his room before his mysterious disappearance: it describes the discomfort he feels because of his dual nature: on the one hand, "humanity", i.e. the love of art and the divine - the nobility of spirit and thought - and on the other, "bestiality" (the "wolf"), in search of instinctive and savage pleasures and satisfactions. He also seems to be torn between two cultures or religions: one is civilized and accepted by all, steeped in boredom, corruption and oppression, and the other is completely lonely and desperate. Only the smell of silence and cleanliness, the careful planning of a journey, the contemplation of a giant Araucaria are the only moments of calm and refreshment in the immense confusion he experiences in the last days of his existence.
His shady and restless character makes it difficult, if not impossible, for him to socialize and leads him to hate and despise the vanity and superficiality of the bourgeois world. Social isolation and the inability to enjoy life bring him ever closer to suicide, which he contemplates once he reaches the age of 50, in the firm conviction that it will prove to be the final emergency exit when it will no longer be possible to alleviate the depth of the suffering that grips him.
But at the most dramatic moment of all, towards the middle of the novel, he meets the beautiful and seductive Hermione (her name is the feminine form of "Hermann") on the balcony of a suburban pub, a woman who gradually leads him to a conversion to the pleasures of modern life, so that Harry makes up for lost time. She is a young woman who, in order to make ends meet, invites wealthy men over every chance she gets: Harry and "Hermione" refer to themselves as "brothers in spirit".
Hermione sees herself in Harry as in a mirror and often gets the right answers to her own questions and doubts from him; for her, he is an inner guide, like Virgil was for Dante in the Divine Comedy. They are true soul mates, and together they seem to relearn what the meaning of life is; Harry finds in Hermione a person to whom he can confide his innermost secrets, even that of wanting to kill himself. He is now convinced that he has regained the ability to love that he thought he had lost. In the meantime, the young woman teaches him to dance, familiarizes him with drugs and provides him with occasional love affairs.
As a result, Hermione introduces Harry to her friend Marie and the two end up sleeping together. Late one night, Harry attends a masked ball in a large building with countless rooms and long, empty corridors; in the confusion, he loses sight of Hermione and is left alone. At four o'clock in the morning, he is taken to a "magic theatre" in the basement: Here he finds his beloved disguised as a man, accompanied by her friend Marie, and dances with her. Thanks to a drug given to him by Pablo, a musician friend of Hermione's, Harry begins to have strange hallucinations: He finds himself in a horseshoe-shaped corridor of a theater with strange inscriptions on the doors.
In his final hallucinogenic experience, Haller sees Pablo and Hermione having sex on the floor in front of him; seized by the rage of jealousy, he picks up a knife from the floor that has been left there and stabs the woman in the left breast, who soon bleeds to death. Haller's crime is punishable by eternal life, much to the derision of the greats of the past (Mozart, Handel and Goethe) who are sitting next to him. They challenge him to understand once and for all the macabre humor that makes up all reality and to learn to laugh without giving too much weight to his feelings. Instead of stabbing his beloved (even if only in a hallucination), he should have laughed at himself and his absurd jealousy.
