The Pearl
John Steinbeck
"The Pearl" by John Steinbeck is a symbolic novel that tells the story of a poor pearl diver, Kino, who discovers a magnificent pearl that he believes will bring prosperity and a better life for his family. Instead of solving their problems, the pearl brings greed, envy, and violence into their lives, forcing them to confront the corrupting nature of wealth. The novel is a powerful parable about materialism, social injustice, and the struggle to maintain one's soul and dignity in a hostile world.

Summary
Kino, a young Mexican Indian pearl diver, awakes in the pre-dawn darkness in his small thatched house in a poor neighborhood outside La Paz. He lives a life of peace and happiness with his wife, Juana, and their infant son, Coyotito, his contentment expressed through the mental "Song of Family." This tranquility is shattered when a scorpion climbs toward Coyotito and stings him. As the baby screams, Juana sucks the poison from the wound, knowing it could be fatal. She insists they go to the doctor, a member of the white race that has long oppressed her people. The lazy, obese doctor, however, demands payment in advance and refuses to treat the poor Indian child when Kino can only produce eight small pearls. Ashamed and enraged, Kino punches the doctor’s gate until his hand bleeds.
With no other choice, Kino and Juana take their precious canoe out onto the Gulf waters, hoping to find a great pearl to pay the doctor. As Kino searches the seabed, he spots a "ghostly gleam" from within a very large oyster. He returns to the boat and opens it to find the "greatest pearl in the world," perfect and as large as a seagull’s egg. As they rejoice, Juana discovers that the swelling on Coyotito's shoulder has begun to recede.
Word of Kino's "Pearl of the World" spreads quickly through La Paz, stirring something "infinitely black and evil in the town." The priest sees it as a way to enlarge the church, beggars see it as a source of alms, and the doctor imagines returning to a luxurious life in Paris. Kino, unaware of the growing envy, tells his brother Juan Tomas that he plans to have a proper marriage ceremony, buy new clothes and a rifle, and send Coyotito to school to lift the family from ignorance. The priest soon visits to remind Kino to donate to the church. The doctor then arrives, claiming Coyotito is not yet out of danger. Though suspicious, Kino allows the doctor to give the baby a strange white powder, which causes him to vomit violently. The doctor returns later to "cure" the child and then tries to determine where the pearl is hidden. After he leaves, Kino buries the pearl, telling Juana he now fears everyone. Later that night, he awakes to fight off a stranger in the hut, receiving a blow to the head. Frightened, Juana says the pearl is evil and begs Kino to throw it back into the sea, but he refuses to relinquish his dream.
The next morning, Kino takes the pearl to the pearl buyers in La Paz. The buyers, who secretly work for one main dealer, have a plan to cheat him. The first buyer claims the pearl is too large and offers only 1,000 pesos, when Kino asked for 50,000. The other dealers make similarly meager offers. Furious, Kino storms off, declaring he will take the pearl to the capital to sell it. He returns home feeling he has "lost one world and not gained another." His brother warns him of the danger of defying the town's entire structure. That night, Kino is ambushed and badly beaten by several strangers. Juana again calls the pearl evil and asks him to throw it away, but Kino refuses, making plans to travel to the capital.
Later that night, Juana takes the pearl and goes to the Gulf to throw it in, but Kino follows her, stops her, and savagely beats her. On his way back home, he is attacked again by strangers. He manages to stab and kill one of them before being knocked unconscious. Juana finds the pearl in the path beside her groggy husband and the dead body. Realizing they must flee, Kino sends her for Coyotito. He goes to prepare his canoe but finds someone has punched a hole in it. Enraged at the destruction of this link to his ancestors, he returns to the village to find his house ablaze. Juana and Coyotito are safe, and the three hide in the house of Juan Tomas, where Kino tells his brother the pearl "has become my soul." When darkness falls, he leads his family "to the north."
Kino, Juana, and Coyotito travel around La Paz and hide during the day. As Kino looks at the pearl, he sees only nightmarish images of his violent acts. Soon, he spots three trackers pursuing them—two on foot and a rifleman on horseback. Panicked, the family flees into the mountains. Kino suggests they split up, but Juana’s resolve strengthens him, and he leads them to a secluded pool with a small cave where they can hide. The trackers arrive at dusk and set up camp by the pool. Deciding this is his only chance, Kino sneaks up on the men. Just as he prepares to strike, Coyotito begins to cry. Thinking the baby's cry is a coyote pup, the rifleman fires toward the cave. Kino furiously wrenches the gun from the man and kills all three trackers. He then hears a hysterical cry of death from the cave: Coyotito has been killed by the rifleman’s bullet.
At sundown the following day, a bereaved Kino and Juana return to La Paz. He carries the rifle while she holds Coyotito’s body wrapped in a shawl. They seem "removed from human experience," as if they had gone through pain and come out on the other side. They walk deliberately through the city to the shore. Kino offers the pearl to Juana, but she simply says, “No, you.” He then throws the pearl into the water, where it sinks to the bottom and disappears in a "little cloud of sand."