The Castle
Franz Kafka


"The Castle", one of Franz Kafka's last and unfinished works, published posthumously in 1926, is a profound and confusing novel that takes the reader into a world of mysterious hierarchies and impenetrable bureaucracy. The story is about K., a land surveyor who comes to a mysterious village to work in a gigantic, inaccessible castle. K makes desperate and often frustrating attempts to gain access to the castle and make contact with the mysterious authorities who control the castle and the village.
Summary
On an icy night, the protagonist, referred to in the novel only as K., arrives in a village where a mysterious castle is located. In the tavern, he pretends to be a surveyor and claims to have been invited by the count himself, Graf Westwest, to do business there.
After initial misunderstandings between K. and the inhabitants of the Herrenhof Inn, who had been hostile towards him, K. is officially informed by a letter delivered to him by a messenger named Barnabas that he has been hired by the count and that his direct superior will be the mayor. The letter is signed by the head of the 10th department, an official named Klamm.
At the inn, K. meets Frieda, a maid and mistress of the official Klamm. Frieda herself allows K. to spy on the officer through a special hole while he is resting in a reserved room. Immediately afterwards, K. secretly has sexual intercourse with Frieda on the floor under the bar counter. Frieda leaves her honorable position as Klamm's mistress to follow K..
When K. arrives at his superior, the mayor, he informs him that his appointment as land surveyor was merely an unfortunate mistake, a bureaucratic misunderstanding due to the complexity of the administration. However, at K.'s insistence, the mayor hastens to clarify that it was not a mistake, but a misunderstanding, because one of the principles of the administration's work is that one must never consider the possibility of a mistake. Mistakes are not made, and even if they happen exceptionally, who can say in the end that it was really a mistake?
As a result, the teacher at the local school offers him a temporary position as janitor. Forced by the circumstances, but also by the urging of Frieda, who understands the difficulties of the situation, K. accepts.
K. is still determined to get his position as land surveyor recognized and pulls out all the stops to get a meeting with the official Klamm. He waits for a long time at the exit of the Herrenhof Inn, instructs the messenger Barnabas to deliver his message and uses the trust of the young Hans Braunschweig to reach his destination via his family. But all his efforts seem to be in vain. The villagers gather around the official as if he needs to be protected from something, but even they don't realize what he is supposed to be protected from. From Barnabas, K. receives a second letter from Klamm praising his commitment as a land surveyor, which K. takes note of in amazement.
The first day in his new job as janitor is a disaster. At night, the cold forces K. to break into the woodshed, and so the night passes with much discomfort, with the two helpers always nearby and becoming increasingly clumsy, so that one of them even manages to get into K.'s bed and take advantage of Frieda's frequent absence. The next day, the teacher dismisses K., who refuses to leave the school. She scratches K.'s hand with the paw of her own obese cat. K. dismisses the two helpers and locks them out, but they continue to bang on the window unperturbed. Frieda suggests that K. should leave the village, but something dark already seems to bind K. to the place.
Around the middle of the novel, Olga, the sister of the messenger Barnabas, tells K. in detail about the history of her family. They were once highly respected until Amalia, another sister of Barnabas, was rejected. At a public feast, an official named Sortini noticed the well-dressed and attractive Amalia. The girl, who probably expected the attention befitting her rank, instead received a vulgar and almost threatening letter from the official, which she tore up indignantly.
From that moment on, Amalia and her family fell inexorably out of favor, although no one blamed Amalia. Her father was dismissed from his job as a fireman, financial difficulties and the indifference of fellow citizens and even friends pushed her further and further into the sidelines. The position that Barnabas has now obtained after years of efforts to be readmitted to the castle is the first sign of rehabilitation. K. listens attentively to Olga's explanations and is thus able to get a more accurate, albeit still incomplete, picture of how the castle regulates things in the village.
It seems certain that all the villagers hold the castle's officials in the highest esteem. The bureaucratic machinery is huge and complex: secretaries and officials are constantly active in the castle, minutes are kept of everything, and the villagers are given audiences at night. The minutes are intended for high-ranking officials, such as Klamm, who in most cases do not read them. Access to the castle is ultimately a difficult undertaking because, as Olga explains to K., the castle has many entrances. Sometimes only one is intact and sometimes only the other, in which case the first is inaccessible. They have not yet been able to find out what rules govern these changes.
When K. returns from his meeting with Olga, he learns that he has been sued by his assistants for mistreatment, and not only that: Frieda has left him for one of them, Jeremias, and returned to her work at the bar in the Herrenhof Inn. Later, K. is summoned by Erlanger, one of Klamm's secretaries. At four o'clock in the morning, after seeing Frieda again, K. looks for Erlanger's room in the Herrenhof Inn, but inadvertently enters the room of Br端gel, another secretary. He wakes Br端gel and holds him in his room, which also serves as an office, with both of them sitting on the bed. Br端gel continues Olga's explanations about how things are going in the village, but K., overwhelmed by sleep and fatigue, falls asleep clutching Br端gel's foot.
When K. wakes up, he meets Pepi, a maid who had taken over Frieda's position in the bar but plans to return to work as a maid. Pepi arouses K.'s suspicion that Frieda's entire behavior was part of a perfidious intrigue to underline the importance of her own position. Soon afterwards, K. meets Gerstacker, a coachman he already knows, who wants to offer him a job. At this point, the novel comes to an abrupt end.
In a note by Max Brod on the first edition, the editor explains that Kafka had informed him of his intention that K. should die of exhaustion. At the same moment, the formalization of his right to stay and work in the village would arrive from the castle.
