The Plague
Albert Camus
"The Plague" by Albert Camus is a seminal work that chronicles a devastating epidemic in the French Algerian city of Oran. The novel is a powerful allegory that explores the human response to suffering, chaos, and the "absurdity" of an indifferent universe. On a deeper level, the book symbolizes the Nazi occupation of France during World War II, examining themes of exile, solidarity, and the moral responsibility to fight against oppression and injustice, even in the face of inevitable death. As a profound exploration of the human condition, "The Plague" stands as one of the major works of existentialist thought and a cornerstone of 20th-century literature.
Summary
In the 1940s, life in the Algerian town of Oran is dull and predictable. When Dr. Bernard Rieux finds a dead rat on his office landing on April 16, he reports it to the concierge, Monsieur Michel, who is outraged. That evening, Rieux sees another rat die, spurting blood. The next day, Rieux’s wife, who has tuberculosis, leaves for a sanatorium. Soon after, Rieux is visited by Raymond Rambert, a journalist who wants to report on the poor living conditions of the Arab population, but Rieux refuses the interview when Rambert admits his paper will not publish a full condemnation. As the number of dead rats increases to 8,000 in a single day, panic sets in, but subsides when the numbers drop. That day, M. Michel falls ill with a high fever, and Rieux’s former patient Joseph Grand asks him to check on a neighbor, M. Cottard, who has attempted suicide. Cottard, who is upset about the incident being reported, asks to be left alone. Rieux finds M. Michel critically ill, and by the next afternoon, the concierge is dead.
Another visitor to Oran, Jean Tarrou, keeps detailed notebooks about daily events. He and Rieux’s colleague, Dr. Castel, agree that the mysterious illness is the plague. Rieux concludes that the only course of action is to confront the plague realistically. Joseph Grand, a city clerk, informs Rieux that the death toll is rising. Rieux convinces the authorities to convene a health committee and call the epidemic a plague, but they have to wait for serum to arrive from Paris. Grand notes that Cottard has become much more outgoing and likable since his suicide attempt, and that Cottard seems to be worried about being arrested. The plague spreads, and the Prefect finally receives orders to declare a state of plague and close the town.
From the moment the town is closed, the plague becomes everyone’s concern. The citizens are forced into a state of "exile," cut off from loved ones and the outside world, living only for the present. Food, gas, and electricity are rationed. Grand tells Rieux how his wife left him, and Rambert tells Rieux he wants to leave Oran to rejoin his wife in Paris, but Rieux refuses to issue a medical certificate. When Rambert accuses him of living in a world of abstractions, Rieux, who is also separated from his wife, replies that abstractions like the plague must be dealt with. Father Paneloux delivers a sermon, telling the congregation they deserve the calamity as punishment for their sins. Meanwhile, Grand confides to Rieux that he has been writing a book for years but has only completed a single sentence, struggling to find the perfect words.
A second, less effective batch of serum arrives as the plague worsens, now affecting the lungs as well as causing buboes. When the authorities consider using prisoners for hospital work, Tarrou suggests forming voluntary sanitary squads, stating he hates the idea of people being condemned to death. Motivated by a personal code of morals, he organizes the groups despite the high risk. Grand agrees to keep statistics for the squads, embodying the "quiet courage" that motivates the volunteers. Cottard, now involved in smuggling, refuses to help fight the plague, admitting that it suits him by diverting authorities from his own crimes. Rambert initially feels he is not part of the struggle but, after learning of Rieux's own separation, offers to work with the sanitary squads until he can find a way to escape.
The death toll becomes so high that streetcars are used to transport bodies to large pits, where they are covered with lime. The townspeople grow numb, accepting their fate. Rambert is put in charge of a quarantine station, and Rieux learns his wife’s condition has worsened. He advises Rambert to speed up his escape plans with the smugglers. However, when the moment comes, Rambert decides he would be ashamed to pursue happiness alone and chooses to stay and continue working with Rieux and Tarrou. The magistrate M. Othon’s young son contracts the plague and dies horribly, despite being treated with Dr. Castel’s new serum. Father Paneloux, who witnesses the boy’s agony, is deeply troubled but concludes that one must love even what one cannot understand as part of God's plan. Rieux, outraged, declares that he will "never love a scheme of things in which innocent children are tortured."
Paneloux gives a second sermon, arguing that Christians must accept all of God's will. Soon after, he falls ill himself and, refusing a doctor, is taken to the hospital, where he dies passively, his official cause of death unknown. One evening, Tarrou and Rieux spend time together "for friendship's sake" and go for a swim. Tarrou reveals his past: as a young man, he was horrified to discover his father was a prosecuting attorney whose job was to seek the death penalty. Believing that all social order is based on the death sentence, he dedicated his life to fighting against it, only to realize that even revolutionary movements could lead to death. He tells Rieux he believes the plague is within everyone, and that a good person is one who infects as few people as possible.
After his son's death, Othon volunteers to work at the quarantine station. Joseph Grand contracts the plague and, believing he is dying, asks Rieux to burn his manuscript. Miraculously, he recovers and vows to start anew on his sentence. Soon after, live rats reappear in Oran, and the death toll begins to decrease.
As prices fall and restrictions are eased, the Prefect announces the gates will reopen in two weeks. Only Cottard is displeased. A few days before the opening, Tarrou falls ill with the plague. He fights valiantly but ultimately succumbs, leading Rieux to conclude that all one can win against the plague is knowledge and memory. The next day, a telegram informs Rieux that his wife has died. The gates finally open, and separated families, including Rambert and his wife, are joyfully reunited. At this point, the narrator reveals his identity: he is Dr. Rieux. One day, he witnesses a deranged Cottard firing a gun into the street before being arrested. Grand tells Rieux he has written to his wife and is feeling happier with a new version of his sentence. Rieux resolves to compile this chronicle to bear witness to the suffering. Listening to the sounds of celebration, he reflects that joy is always endangered, because the plague bacillus never dies or disappears for good and will one day return "for the bane and enlightening" of humanity.