The Idiot
Fyodor Dostoyevsky


"The Idiot" by Fyodor Dostoyevsky is a masterpiece of Russian literature that captivates the reader with its psychological depth, its fascinating characters and its intense examination of human weaknesses and virtues. The novel tells the story of the young Prince Lev Nikolayevich Myshkin, who returns to Russia after a long stay in a Swiss sanatorium. Because of his naivety and kindness, he is often referred to as an "idiot" as he navigates a society characterized by intrigue, greed and moral depravity.
Summary
The protagonist, Prince Lev Nikolayevich Myshkin, is often considered an "idiot" due to his naivety and infinite goodness. However, Myshkin is far from actually being an idiot. Rather, he embodies a kind of ideal man, a being full of love and compassion. His character traits and his inability to recognize the darker side of human nature, however, lead to complications and tragedies in his life and in the lives of those around him.
Prince Lev Nikolayevich Myshkin is a fair-haired young man in his late twenties. He comes from one of the oldest noble families in Russia. He has spent the last four years in a Swiss clinic for the treatment of "stupidity" and epilepsy. Myshkin's only relative in St. Petersburg was the distant Lizaveta Prokofyevna Epanchin. Madame Epanchin is the wife of General Epanchin, a wealthy and respected man in his late fifties. The Prince meets the Epanchins, who have three daughters, Alexandra, Adelaida and Aglaya, the youngest and most beautiful daughter. General Epanchin has an ambitious and rather arrogant adjutant named Gavril Ardalyonovich Ivolgin (nickname: Ganya). Myshkin also meets him during a house call. Ganya tries to marry the extraordinarily beautiful "woman of destiny" Nastassya Filippovna Barashkov, who was once the aristocrat Totsky's mistress, although he is actually in love with Aglaya. Totsky has promised Ganya 75,000 roubles if he marries the "in love" Nastassya Filippovna. Because Myshkin is so innocent and naive, Ganya openly discusses the marriage proposal in front of the prince.
The prince leases a room in the Ivolgin apartment, home to Ganya, his sister Varvara Ardalyonovna (Varya), his mother Nina Alexandrovna, his younger brother Nikolay (Kolya), his father General Ivolgin, and another tenant, Ferdyshchenko. Nastassya Filipovna comes to the apartment and tries to humiliate Ganya's family, who refuse to accept her as a possible wife for Ganya. Myshkin stops her, however, and finds her behavior shameful. Suddenly, a noisy crowd of drunks and vagabonds arrives at the house, led by the twenty-seven-year-old black-haired Parfyon Semyonovich Rogozhin, who is passionately in love with Nastassya Filippovna. Rogozhin promises to bring 100,000 roubles for the birthday party at which Nastassya Filippovna will announce that evening whether or not she is to marry Ganya.
The party's attendees are Totsky, General Epanchin, Ganya, Ferdyshchenko, Ganya’s loan shark friend Ptitsyn—who admires Varya Ivolgin—and several others. With Kolya Ivolgin's help, Prince Myshkin also arrives, albeit uninvited. On the Prince's advice, Nastassya Filippovna refuses Ganya's offer. Rogozhin arrives with the promised 100,000 roubles, but suddenly Myshkin himself proposes to Nastassya Filippovna and reveals that he has recently learned that he has received a large inheritance. Nastassya Filippovna is shocked by such a generous offer from an honest and generous heart and leaves the party with Rogozhin and his gang, as she considers herself worthy to be alone with Rogozhin.
Prince Myshkin spends the next six months pursuing Nastassya Filippovna, who has fled from Rogozhin. Myshkin's inheritance turned out to be smaller than expected, and the more he satisfied the mostly unjustified claims of creditors and supposed relatives, the smaller it became. Finally, the prince returns to Petersburg and visits Rogozhin's house, a dark and gloomy place. After a religious discussion, they exchange crosses, which they hang around each other's necks. Later that day, Rogozhin tries to stab Myshkin in the hall of the hotel where the prince is staying, but the prince has a sudden epileptic seizure and survives the attack.
A few days after the attack, Myshkin travels to Pavlovsk, a summer residence popular with the St. Petersburg nobility. The prince rents several rooms from Lebedyev, a disturbed civil servant. Most of the characters in the novel - the Yepanchins, the Ivolgins, Varya and her husband Ptitsyn and Nastassya Filippovna - also spend the summer in Pavlovsk. Burdovsky, a young man who claims to be the son of Myshkin's deceased benefactor Pavlishchev, approaches the Prince and demands money in "just" return for Pavlishchev 's support of the Prince. Burdovsky is supported by a group of arrogant youths, including Ippolit Terentyev, a seventeen-year-old tuberculosis sufferer and friend of Kolya Ivolgin. Although Burdovsky's claim is obviously false, Myshkin is prepared to support Burdovsky financially.
The prince spends most of his time with the Epanchins. The people around him soon realize that he is in love with Aglaya and that she probably reciprocates his feelings. However, as Aglaya is an arrogant, stubborn and capricious girl, she refuses to accept her love for Prince Myshkin and often even openly mocks him. Aglaya's family begins to treat the prince as her fiancé and even organizes a dinner party attended by many famous guests from Russian high society. During an impassioned speech about religion and the future of the aristocracy, Myshkin accidentally breaks a beautiful Chinese vase. Later that evening, he suffers a mild epileptic seizure. The guests and the family are therefore convinced that the apparently ill prince is not a good match for Aglaya.
However, Aglaya does not give up on Myshkin and even arranges a meeting with Nastassya Filippovna, who writes him letters to persuade him to marry her. During this meeting, the two women force the prince to choose between his romantic love for Aglaya and his compassionate love for Nastassja Filippovna. Myshkin hesitates briefly, whereupon Aglaya flees, dashing all hopes of a reunion between the two. Nastassya Filippovna wants to marry the Prince, but ultimately does not have the courage to do so and flees at the last minute before the planned wedding to Rogozhin.
The Prince follows them to St. Petersburg, where Rogozhin stabs Nastassya Filippovna to death during the night. The two men guard her body, which Rogozhin places on the floor of his study room. In the epilogue, Rogozhin is sentenced to fifteen years of forced labor in Siberia, Prince Myshkin loses his mind and returns to a Swiss sanatorium, and Aglaya leaves Russia with a Polish count, who lies to her and leaves her soon afterwards.
