The Catcher in the Rye
Jerome David Salinger


"The Catcher in the Rye" by J.D. Salinger is a masterpiece of American literature that takes the reader on a profound and emotional journey. The novel describes a few days in the life of 16-year-old outsider Holden Caulfield, who has just been suspended from his school. The book explores themes of identity, belonging and the transition to adulthood. It is known for its frank portrayal of adolescent angst and alienation and has received both controversy and significant acclaim.
Summary
The narrator, Holden Caulfield, a 16-year-old New Yorker, has just been expelled from his boarding school. Holden is characterized by poor academic performance (he has already been expelled from several schools) and believes that most people are "phony", with a few exceptions, such as his ex-girlfriend Jane Gallagher, whom he constantly remembers. The great love he feels for his siblings, one of whom, Allie, is dead, is also emphasized.
The story begins on a Saturday, just before Christmas. Holden has been told that he will not be able to return to his school (in Pennsylvania) after the vacations. He spends his last moments at school in the company of Robert Ackley, a student Holden dislikes. After an argument with Ward Stradlater, his roommate, he decides not to wait until Wednesday to return to New York (where he lives with his parents) and leaves the same night.
In his hometown, he stays at the Edmont Hotel, whose standard is described as very low. He goes to the hotel bar but does not feel comfortable: he is not allowed to drink and the women he talks to seem stupid to him. He decides to go to "Ernie's" to have a drink, but meets one of his brother's ex-girlfriends there, so he decides to go back to the hotel.
When he goes to his room, the elevator operator tells Holden that he can get a prostitute to have sex with him for 5 dollars. He agrees, but when the prostitute, Sunny, comes to his room, he regrets it. He wants to pay her anyway, but she claims the fee is 10 dollars, and Holden refuses to pay more than agreed. He refuses to give her the missing 5 dollars and swears at the elevator operator, who then hits him while the prostitute takes the 5 dollars from his wallet.
When Holden wakes up the next day, he calls Sally Hayes, a girl he has often gone out with. They arrange to meet that evening. After leaving the hotel, he buys a record for his sister while waiting for the date.
Holden and Sally go to the theater and then to the skating rink. Holden suggests that Sally flee the city and live in a cabin. She thinks this is a bad idea, which upsets Holden, and he tells her that he doesn't like her very much. As a result, Sally goes home crying and offended and does not accept the apology.
Holden invites a former schoolmate, Carl Luce, to a bar. The meeting with Luce is brief as he tells him he has to leave quickly. Holden is still in the bar anyway and drinks until he is drunk.
Holden wants to see his sister Phoebe, a little girl of just over ten, but not his parents. He goes home and sneaks into his sister's room. It turns out that their parents are at a party, so Holden and Phoebe can talk in peace. When Phoebe learns that her brother has been expelled from school again, she gets angry and starts to question Holden, accusing him of being a person who doesn't like anyone or anything. In this conversation, the protagonist explains that he wants to be a "catcher in the rye" (a kind of chaperone for children playing in a field of rye on the edge of a cliff).
When the parents return, Phoebe hides her brother in the wardrobe. Eventually Holden escapes from the house unseen. He goes to the house of Mr. Antolini, a former teacher who likes him very much. Antolini prepares his sofa for him so that he can sleep on it. Shortly after he goes to bed, Holden wakes up to his former professor stroking his head. Shocked at the thought of being in the presence of a pervert, he quickly gets dressed and leaves.
He spends the night in a subway station. Walking alone through the city, he decides to head west. First he wants to tell his sister about his decision and leaves her a note at school saying that he wants to meet her at the museum. Phoebe arrives with a suitcase and says that she will go with him. Holden refuses, which upsets his sister. To cheer her up, he takes her to the zoo and on a merry-go-round. As she spins, Holden feels happy (the first time in the book he expresses this feeling). In the end, he decides not to go.
In the final chapter of the novel, several months later, Holden says he has been ill and is now in a mental institution recovering. He also says that he misses some of the people he has talked about throughout the story.
