The Stranger
Albert Camus
"The Stranger" by Albert Camus is a seminal work of philosophical fiction that charts the journey of a man who leads a meaningless life and is suddenly confronted with his own mortality after committing a pointless murder. The novel follows the narrator, Meursault, a detached office clerk in French Algiers, whose indifference to societal norms and expectations ultimately leads to his condemnation. Through Meursault's story, Camus provides a masterful exploration of absurdity, the indifference of the universe, and the human struggle to find meaning in a world devoid of inherent purpose.

Summary
The story begins as Meursault, an unambitious office clerk in Algiers, receives a telegram informing him that his mother has died at the Home for Aged Persons in Marengo. He feels that his employer is annoyed by his request for leave and apologizes, though he inwardly feels the excuse is unnecessary. At the Home, Meursault senses the Warden is judging him for placing his mother there and for his infrequent visits. During the vigil, he feels awkward declining to view his mother’s body, accepts coffee from the Doorkeeper, and smokes a cigarette, all while bothered by the glare of the white walls. When his mother's elderly friends arrive for the vigil, he gets the "absurd impression" that they have come to sit in judgment on him. He remembers little of the funeral procession itself, which he attends with the Warden, a nurse, and his mother’s fiancé, Thomas Pérez, and is mainly pleased to see his bus return to the brightly lit streets of Algiers.

The day after the funeral, Meursault goes swimming and meets Marie Cardona, a former typist from his office. They swim, see a comedy film, and then return to his apartment to make love. The next day, he avoids his usual lunch spot, Céleste’s restaurant, to avoid being questioned about the funeral, and instead spends the day observing people from his window.
Returning from work, Meursault encounters his neighbors: the old widower Salamano, who is yelling at his mangy dog, and Raymond Sintés, a reputed pimp. Raymond invites him to dinner and reveals he was in a fistfight with the brother of his mistress after discovering her infidelity. He asks Meursault to write a letter to lure the woman back so he can punish her again. Finding no reason to refuse, Meursault agrees, and Raymond declares them "pals."

The following weekend, Marie asks Meursault if he loves her; he replies that the question has no meaning but that he probably doesn’t. They overhear a violent argument in Raymond’s room, and when the police arrive, Meursault acts as a witness for Raymond, claiming the woman had been unfaithful. Later, a distraught Salamano visits, having lost his dog.
Raymond invites Meursault and Marie to a seaside cottage belonging to his friend, Masson, for the upcoming Sunday. He confides that he is being followed by his ex-mistress's brother. Meanwhile, Meursault’s employer offers him a new position in Paris, but Meursault's indifference prompts the employer to accuse him of lacking ambition. That evening, Marie asks him to marry her. He agrees, admitting he doesn't love her and would marry any other woman who asked.
On Sunday, on their way to the beach, Raymond spots a group of Arabs, including "his man." At the beach, after a pleasant swim and lunch, Meursault, Raymond, and Masson encounter two of the Arabs on a walk. A fight starts, and Raymond is slashed with a knife before the Arabs retreat. After Raymond's wound is treated, he and Meursault walk back to the beach, where they find the two Arabs again. Meursault dissuades Raymond from shooting the man who injured him and takes his revolver. The Arabs vanish, and the two men return to the cottage.
Overwhelmed by the blinding sun and heat, Meursault walks back to the beach alone, seeking the cool shade near a spring. To his surprise, the Arab who cut Raymond is there. The intense sun and heat disorient Meursault. As he takes a step forward toward the shade, the Arab draws his knife. Blinded by a "blade of light" from the knife, Meursault feels his grip tighten on the revolver. The shot goes off, destroying the "equilibrium of the day." He then fires four more shots into the motionless body, which he describes as "four loud knocks at the door of his undoing."

Meursault is arrested and jailed. His lawyer is concerned when he learns that Meursault showed "great callousness" at his mother's funeral. During an interrogation, the Examining Magistrate urges him to repent and believe in God, but Meursault's refusal leads the Magistrate to call him the most hardened soul he has ever encountered. Marie visits him once before she is forbidden from seeing him, as they are not married. Meursault eventually adapts to prison, losing track of time and passing the days by sleeping and reliving memories. He is startled one day to hear his own voice, realizing he has begun talking to himself.
At his trial, Meursault feels like an outsider in a clubby atmosphere, recognizing many faces in the crowd, including Raymond, Marie, and Céleste. The Prosecutor builds a case against his character, using testimony from the Doorkeeper about his behavior at the funeral—smoking, drinking coffee, and not crying—to paint him as a moral monster. The Prosecutor highlights his "liaison" with Marie the day after the funeral and his friendship with a pimp. When Meursault's lawyer questions if he is on trial for burying his mother or killing a man, the Prosecutor declares that Meursault was "already a criminal at heart" at the funeral. Meursault finds the proceedings interesting at first but soon feels excluded, realizing the case is being made without him. He admits the Prosecutor's argument that the crime was premeditated sounds plausible. When he tries to explain he killed the Arab "because of the sun," the court finds it nonsensical. The Prosecutor argues he is "morally guilty" of his mother's death and demands the death penalty. Meursault is found guilty and sentenced to be publicly decapitated.

After his conviction, Meursault clings to the hope of a loophole in his sentence but also consoles himself that everyone must die. One day, the prison Chaplain visits against his wishes, attempting to discuss God and an afterlife. The Chaplain’s certainty enrages Meursault, who erupts in anger, yelling that he is far surer of his life and his impending death than the Chaplain is of any afterlife. This outburst purges him of hope. In the aftermath, he thinks of his mother and understands why, near death, she took a "fiancé," realizing she must have felt on the brink of freedom. Washed clean of hope, he lays his heart bare "to the tender indifference of the universe." He understands that he has been happy and is happy still. For his end to be complete, he wishes only that a large crowd will greet his execution with "cries of hatred."