The Trial
Franz Kafka


"The Trial" by Franz Kafka, published posthumously, is a profound work that explores the absurd and often oppressive feeling of powerlessness and isolation within an incomprehensible bureaucratic judicial machinery. The novel tells the story of Josef K., a respected bank employee who is arrested one morning without explanation and finds himself caught up in an inscrutable legal process that seems to follow neither logic nor morality.
Summary
On the morning of his 30th birthday, Josef K., a senior bank employee, learns that he has been arrested by two unrecognizable officers of an unknown authority for an unspecified offence. Instead of being sent to prison, he remains at large and is told to wait for further instructions from a committee. Mrs. Grubach, his landlady, shows sympathy and suspects that the arrest could be connected to an indecent relationship with his neighbor Miss Bürstner. Josef visits Bürstner, shares his concerns and kisses her.
A few days later, Josef notices that Miss Montag, another lodger, has moved in with Miss Bürstner and believes that this is an attempt to distance him from her. He receives a vague invitation to appear in court the following Sunday. After a confusing search, he discovers the court in an attic. His tardiness is sharply criticized, and after a heated defence of his position, he earns the hostility of those present.
In a later attempt to speak to the presiding judge, Josef only meets the wife of a court usher. She informs him about the trial and tries to seduce him before she is abruptly taken away by a law student who thinks she is his girlfriend. The woman's husband then leads Josef through the courtrooms, an experience that ends with Josef's intense weakness in the presence of other court staff and defendants.
One evening, Josef stumbles across a storeroom in his bank where the two agents who arrested him are being whipped by a flogger. The reason for this is their demands for bribes from Josef and his subsequent complaints to the court. Although Josef tries to stand up for the men and bribe the beater, he is unsuccessful. When Josef returns to the storeroom the next day, he is horrified to find the same scene, as if time had stood still.
Josef receives a visit from his uncle, a countryman who is traveling and is worried about the rumors about Josef. The uncle leads Josef to Mr. Huld, a frail, bedridden lawyer who is being cared for by the young nurse Leni. Leni is quickly attracted to Josef and lures him into an adjoining room for an intimate encounter during the conversation. After leaving the room, Josef meets his angry uncle, who accuses him of having damaged his own case by his disrespectful attitude towards the trial.
During further visits to Huld, Josef soon realizes that the lawyer is moody and of limited use. At the bank, a client advises him to turn to Titorelli, the court's official painter. Although Titorelli has no real influence over the court, his knowledge of the trial reveals unpleasant truths to Josef, and he offers only convoluted and unpleasant possible avenues, as a genuine acquittal is seemingly impossible. Josef then decides to dismiss Huld and take matters into his own hands.
On a visit to Huld's office, Josef meets Rudi Block, another client whose case has been going on for five years and who has gone from a successful businessman to a near-bankrupt and virtually enslaved individual, mainly because of his dependence on the lawyer and Leni, with whom he appears to be having an affair. Huld mocks Block in Josef's presence, and this experience further deteriorates Josef's opinion of his lawyer.
Josef is assigned to accompany an important Italian client to the city's cathedral. There he is approached by a priest who tells him a parable to illustrate his situation. However, K. sees no parallels to his own situation, nor does he find any use or meaning in the interpretations. On the eve of his thirty-first birthday, Josef is picked up by two men who take him to a small quarry outside the town, where they execute him with a butcher's knife.
