The Tin Drum
Günter Grass


"The Tin Drum" by Günter Grass is one of the most outstanding works of German post-war literature and marks the beginning of Grass' literary career. The novel is the first part of the "Danzig Trilogy" and has been both praised and criticized for its innovative storytelling and unique style. It tells the story of Oskar Matzerath, an extraordinary boy who, on his third birthday, decides to stop growing and instead comment on and influence the world from a child's perspective as he experiences the turbulent events of the 20th century, in particular the rise of National Socialism and the Second World War.
Summary
The novel takes the form of an autobiography. It is about a person named Oscar Matzerath, who was born in 1924 and writes his memoirs while he is in an insane asylum between 1952 and 1954. As he looks through a photo album, various memories of his youth come back to him and he decides to tell the reader his story.
First book
Even before he was conceived, Oscar was endowed with extraordinary intelligence. His memories go back much further than his birth: the book begins with the meeting of his grandmother and grandfather. The narrator is born in the Free City of Gdańsk. Only the promise of a drum, which he receives as a present for his third birthday, convinces him not to return to his mother Agnes' womb. Oscar also has an amazing ability: he can let out a cry so piercing that it can break glass from a distance. On his third birthday, he receives the coveted little tin drum and decides not to enter the adult world because he despises the hypocrisy and mediocrity he sees in them: By the sheer effect of his will, he interrupts the natural process of his own growth. He stages a serious fall into the cellar to make his parents believe that this accident is the cause of his stagnant growth.
Throughout the first part of the novel, Oscar witnesses the rise of National Socialism and silently experiences the first persecutions of the Jews. He experiences several love stories while maintaining the appearance of a three-year-old who constantly and jealously clings to his little drum.
Oscar believes that he has two putative fathers: Alfred Matzerath, a member of the NSDAP and his mother's husband, and Jan Bronski, a Polish citizen of the town and his mother's lover. His mother dies in despair as a result of fish poisoning.
Second book
After his father Jan is murdered by the German army during the storming of the Polish post office in Gdańsk, Alfred marries Maria, a young woman who has secretly given Oscar his first full sexual experience. She (supposedly) gives birth to Oscar's illegitimate son Kurt. But the son, who continues to grow up, soon disappoints his biological father.
During the war, Oscar meets his friend and mentor Bebra, a dwarf who introduces him to a group of dwarf artists who are supposed to entertain the German troops at the front. On this occasion, he meets the enchanting dwarf Roswitha Raguna, who becomes his second love. However, when Roswitha is killed by Allied soldiers during the landing in Normandy, Oscar returns to his family in Gdańsk, where he becomes the leader of a gang of young criminals. The police finally arrest the gang, but Oscar, who manages to have himself categorized as insane, escapes death by hanging.
Soviet troops soon conquer Danzig and Oscar's alleged father Alfred dies because he chokes on the Nazi badge he had tried to hide by swallowing it. Maria is then courted by Mr. Fajngold, a Jewish survivor of the death camps, who asks her to marry him, but she rejects his proposal. When Alfred Matzerath's body is placed in a pit, Kurt throws a stone at Oscar. It falls on his father's remains. This incident causes him to grow back naturally at the age of over 20 - although he claims that he had decided to grow back himself before the shock. As he grows again, a hump appears on his back. Oscar moves from Gdańsk to Düsseldorf, accompanied by his widowed mother-in-law Maria and her son Kurt.
Third book
When Oscar arrives in Düsseldorf, he finds a destroyed Germany where the black market rules. He works as an engraver of gravestones.
In a room he rents, he falls in love with Sister Dorothea, a neighboring nurse, but is unable to seduce her. When he meets one of his neighbors, Klepp, he takes back his drum, which he had left behind on the day of Matzerath's funeral, and joins forces with his neighbor, who plays the trumpet, to form a jazz band to perform in the "Onion Cellar" club, where the guests peel onions to cry. One day, while strolling through a field, he stumbles upon a severed finger belonging to Sister Dorothea, who has been murdered. Oscar then consents to being accused of the crime. However, the investigators arrest the real culprit and Oscar is only declared insane because he kept the finger like an idol. He is committed to a psychiatric institution, where he writes his memoirs at the age of over 30. While Oscar is committed to the psychiatric ward, Germany is experiencing an economic miracle. The book ends with the announcement of his imminent release.
