The Godfather
Mario Puzo


"The Godfather" by Mario Puzo is an epochal novel that has significantly shaped the genre of mafia literature. The book tells the epic story of the Corleone family, a powerful mafia dynasty in New York City, and their attempts to maintain power, influence and family in a ruthless and dangerous world. The head of the Corleone family, Vito Corleone, is the awe-inspiring Godfather - a man who rules with unquestioned authority and deep moral ambiguity. Through the eyes of various family members and adversaries, a dramatic and profound portrait of mafia power struggles and criminal enterprises unfolds.
Summary
The story begins with Amerigo Bonasera lamenting the misfortune that has befallen his daughter: a couple of young men have beaten her and disfigured her beautiful face. Bonasera tells his wife that only Don Vito Corleone, the head of the Corleone family, can bring them justice. Don Vito receives many guests in his house because it is the wedding of his daughter Connie Corleone, for which a lavish party has been organized on 25 August 1945, with the famous singer Johnny Fontane in attendance. Don Vito's sons Sonny, Fredo and Michael are also present at the family celebration, as are the Don's confidants, Sal Tessio and Peter Clemenza, as well as the consigliere Tom Hagen. The Don receives a few guests in his office, as no Sicilian can refuse an invitation to his daughter's wedding. The Don listens to Bonasera's pleas and even a request from his godson Johnny, who asks him to convince a film producer to give him a role in his new Hollywood production. At the same meeting, the Don agrees to meet with Virgil Sollozzo, who proposes a deal to the Corleones.
The Don instructs Tom Hagen to talk to Jack Woltz, Johnny's estranged producer, who refuses to hire Johnny, whereupon Don Vito's men murder Woltz's horse and put the horse's head between his sheets. Woltz, who is very frightened by this action, accepts Johnny as an actor, which raises Johnny's profile even further.
Don Vito meets Sollozzo, who suggests that he deal drugs. His plan is to distribute them with the Tattaglia family, and he needs the Corleone family to protect him in return for 30 percent of the profits. However, the Don flatly refuses, arguing that he would lose his privileges with politicians and judges if he entered into such a deal. Sollozzo, angered by this, believes that Don Corleone will be a problem and unsuccessfully attempts to assassinate him. The assassination incurs the wrath of Sonny, the Don's most violent son, and sparks a Mafia war that begins when Peter Clemenza executes the traitor who sold the Don to Sollozzo to kill him. Michael Corleone proposes to assassinate Sollozzo to stop him from trying again, and the police captain who is protecting him, and he himself executes the plan perfectly. With the police looking for him everywhere, Michael flees to Sicily.
In the meantime, Sonny murders Bruno Tattaglia in revenge for the assassination attempt on his father, whereupon the other families try to bring Sonny down. Sonny's brother-in-law Carlo Rizzi sets a trap for him by deliberately beating Sonny's sister so that he finds out about it. Enraged, Sonny leaves the Corleone estate while Carlo informs the families. Sonny is then intercepted by the families in the street and shot dead. Don Corleone calls a meeting of the Families (La Cosa Nostra) of New York, at which he clarifies his position on the drug business and asks everyone to avoid a war, as revenge would not revive Bruno or Sonny and would only harm everyone. He also asks for security for Michael's return.
After Michael's return, the Don confesses to him that the Tattaglia were not really responsible. Emilio Barzini, the Barzini don, was behind everything and warns him that if anyone proposes a meeting with Barzini, it will be a trap and whoever proposes it to him will be the traitor. Don Vito Corleone dies of a heart attack, and at the funeral Sal Tessio proposes the meeting with Barzini to Michael, whereupon Michael has Tessio murdered because he is the traitor. Tessio asks his executioner to tell Michael that "it was nothing personal, just business". Michael later orders the simultaneous murder of Emilio Barzini and Phillip Tattaglia, the two dons of the so-called Five Families. By eliminating their powers, Michael becomes the most powerful man in New York.
However, he decides to at least partially retire from life as a mobster and turn to gambling in the state of Nevada, taking Tom Hagen with him and giving Peter Clemenza the opportunity to start his own family.
The book tells different stories parallel to the main story. Johnny Fontane has some problems with his voice; he can no longer sing like he used to. He is also in debt to the Corleones. To pay off the debt to his godfather, he decides to help his friend Nino Valenti. With the help of the Corleones, Johnny produces several successful films that make them both big movie stars, until Nino's death.
Fredo Corleone was present at the attack on his father, in which he was unharmed and his father was seriously wounded. The trauma of seeing his father about to die led him to live in Las Vegas, where he became an extroverted and seductive man.
Lucy Mancini, who had attempted suicide out of grief over Sonny Corleone's death, moved to Las Vegas because Tom Hagen offered her a job at the hotel run by Fredo and also told her that the Corleone family would pay her an annual pension that Sonny had stipulated in his will. Back in Nevada, after less than two years, she meets a doctor named Jules Segal, the two fall in love, and after some time Jules gives Lucy an engagement ring and they get married.
The author also devotes an entire chapter to the life of the young Vito Andolini. His father was murdered by a Sicilian mafioso who also wanted to kill him so that he would not take revenge. But Vito's mother sent him to the United States, where he began to work in a modest way and met Genco Abbandando, who was to become his best friend. He learned to drive a truck and worked as a delivery boy and met young Sal Tessio and Peter Clemenza.
