The Lord of the Rings
John Ronald Reuel Tolkien


"The Lord of the Rings" by J.R.R. Tolkien is an epic fantasy work that spans three volumes: "The Fellowship of the Ring", "The Two Towers" and "The Return of the King". The work has significantly shaped the genre of high fantasy and is considered one of the greatest literary works of the 20th century. Tolkien created a complex world called Middle-earth, populated by humans, elves, dwarves, hobbits and other fantastic creatures. He wove a rich story around the struggle for the One Ring, which could save the world from darkness or plunge it into it.
Summary
The Fellowship of the Ring
After a prologue describing the hobbits and their customs, Middle-earth's past and a brief summary of Bilbo's adventures, the first book begins with Bilbo's 111th birthday, 60 years after the events described in "The Hobbit". During the Reception, Bilbo disappears thanks to the invisibility granted by his magic ring, leaving most of his possessions, including the ring, to his nephew and designated heir Frodo. Seventeen years later, their old friend, the wizard Gandalf the Grey, reveals to him that his ring is in fact the One Ring (Ring of Power), the instrument of power of Sauron, the Dark Lord, who had once lost it; should he recover it, his power would become insurmountable. Gandalf urges Frodo to leave the Shire, which is no longer safe for him, and make his way to Rivendell, the home of the half-elf Elrond.
Frodo sells his house and disguises his departure by moving to Buckland on the eastern edge of the Shire. Together with his gardener Sam and a young friend, Pippin, he narrowly escapes the Black Riders, Sauron's servants who are supposed to find the Ring of Power, several times. The three companions reach the Buckland in the east of the Shire, where the hobbit Merry joins them. The four hobbits continue their journey eastwards and, thanks to the enigmatic Tom Bombadil, escape the dangers of the Old Forest and the Barrow-Downs. In Bree they meet the strange Ranger, a friend of Gandalf's, who becomes their guide and reveals his true name: Aragorn. The Black Riders, still hot on their heels, manage to wound Frodo, but thanks to the Elf Glorfindel, he manages to cross the Ford of Bruinen and the Black Riders are swept away by a sudden flood of the river. Frodo then faints.
At the beginning of the second book, Frodo wakes up in Rivendell, where he has been cared for by Elrond and where he meets Bilbo again. This is followed by the Council of Elrond, attended by representatives of the most important races of Middle-earth: Elves, Dwarves and Men. Gandalf tells them of the betrayal of Saruman, his superior in the Order of Wizards, who is seeking the Ring of Power for himself. After weighing up all the options, the Council decides that Sauron can only be defeated if the Ring is destroyed by taking it to the heart of Mordor, Sauron's home, and throwing it into the lava of the Cracks of Doom where it was forged. Frodo volunteers to take on this task and a 'Ring Company' is formed to accompany and help him: it consists of Frodo and his three hobbit companions Sam, Merry, Pippin, Gandalf, Aragorn, Boromir (the Captain-General of Gondor), Gimli the Dwarf and Legolas the Elf.
The company crosses the deserted Eregion before attempting to cross the Misty Mountains. After failing against the stormy forces of nature, Gandalf led his companions into the Mines of Moria, an ancient dwarven city now inhabited by goblins, but in the fight against the Balrog, an ancient demonic creature, he fell into an abyss. The Fellowship, now led by Aragorn, leaves Moria and enters the Elvish land of Lothlórien, ruled by Celeborn and Galadriel. Frodo and Sam look into Galadriel's mirror and see visions of the past, the present and a possible future. Frightened by Sauron's eye, Frodo suggests giving the ring to Galadriel, but Galadriel overcomes the temptation. The companions leave Lothlórien in three boats with gifts they have received from the elves and travel down the great river Anduin. Arriving at the Falls of Rauros, the Fellowship splits up after an attack by the Orcs and Frodo and Sam set off alone on their journey to Mordor.
The Two Towers
The second volume follows the various paths taken by the members of the disbanded Fellowship.
At the beginning of the third book, Boromir dies trying to defend Merry and Pippin, who are kidnapped by Saruman's Uruk-hai. After preparing a funeral for Boromir, Aragorn, Legolas and Gimli set out to pursue them across the plains of Rohan. On the edge of Fangorn Forest, they meet Gandalf, who has been sent back to Middle-earth to complete his mission after dying in the defeat of the Balrog. The four companions travel to Edoras, where Gandalf frees King Théoden from the control of his advisor Gríma Wormtongue, a puppet of Saruman. They take part in the war of Rohan against Saruman's armies, who are defeated in battle, while Saruman's fortress Orthanc is stormed by the Ents, tree-like creatures with whom Merry and Pippin have found refuge. Refusing to repent of his mistakes, Saruman is expelled from the Order of Wizards by Gandalf.
The fourth book follows Frodo and Sam on their way to Mordor. They manage to capture and tame Gollum, the former owner of the Ring, who had followed them from Moria. He leads them to a secret entrance to Mordor, which is located in the valley of Minas Morgul. On their journey through Ithilien, they are captured by Boromir's brother Faramir, but he releases them when he learns of the importance of their mission. At the end of the book, Gollum betrays Frodo by leading him to the lair of Shelob, the giant spider. He survives, but is captured by Cirith Ungol's orcs after Sam takes the ring from him, believing that he has died from poisoning by the spider's venom.
The Return of the King
Book five tells the battle between Gondor and Mordor from Merry's point of view alongside King Théoden and from Pippin's point of view in Minas Tirith, the capital of Gondor. Minas Tirith, besieged by thousands of orcs, was saved by the arrival of the Riders of Rohan and later by Aragorn, who liberated the south of Gondor with the help of the Army of the Dead and conquered the fleet of the Corsairs of Umbar allied with Sauron. The Battle of the Pelennor Fields ended in defeat for Sauron's forces, but Sauron still has tremendous powers that the free peoples cannot hope to triumph over. To divert Sauron's attention from Frodo's quest, Aragorn leads a very small army to the Morannon, the Black Gate of Mordor, to fight a desperate battle against Sauron's innumerable forces.
In book six, Sam frees Frodo from the orcs. The two hobbits fight their way through the desert of the Plateau of Gorgoroth and reach Mount Doom, followed by Gollum. The temptation is too great for Frodo, who claims the ring for himself and puts it on his finger. He is attacked by Gollum, who cuts off his finger with his teeth before plunging into the flames of the mountain and celebrating his triumph. This catastrophic turn of events destroys the Ring, finally defeating Sauron and putting his armies to flight. Aragorn is crowned King of Gondor and marries his bride Arwen, the daughter of Elrond. After several weeks of celebrations, the members of the Fellowship return to their homeland. On their return to the Shire, the four hobbits find their land devastated by human bandits and half-orcs. After they have put the bandits to flight, they discover that Saruman is responsible for the chaos, who is killed by Gríma shortly afterwards. The Shire then experiences a great revival, but Frodo, who is physically and mentally injured, cannot enjoy the renewal. Finally, he sails west with Bilbo to find peace, accompanied by the bearers of the three Elven rings, Galadriel, Elrond and Gandalf. The Third Age of the Sun and "The Lord of the Rings" come to an end.
The narrative itself is followed by six appendices, which are intended to provide further information about past elements of the history of the peoples featured in the book.
Appendix A gives a brief overview of the history of the kingdoms of Men and Dwarves.
Appendix B is a chronology of the Second and Third Ages.
Appendix C contains the family trees of the most important hobbits from the Tale.
Appendix D examines the different calendars used by Elves, Men and Hobbits.
Appendix E introduces the two most important alphabets of Middle-earth, Tengwar and Cirth, and provides information on the pronunciation of the languages.
Appendix F deals with the languages of the peoples of Middle-earth and discusses translation issues.
