The Great Gatsby
Francis Scott Fitzgerald


"The Great Gatsby" by F. Scott Fitzgerald is a masterpiece of American literature and one of the greatest depictions of the American dream and its darker side. The novel is set in the roaring twenties, an era of exuberant decadence, cultural upheaval and profound social change. Through the eyes of narrator Nick Carraway, we witness the tragic tale of Jay Gatsby, a mysterious millionaire whose obsessive love for Daisy Buchanan ultimately drives him to his downfall.
Summary
In the spring of 1922, Nick Carraway, a Yale University graduate from the Midwest who served in World War I, moves to New York City to work as a bond trader. He moves into a small rooming house in West Egg on Long Island, near the lavish estate of Jay Gatsby, a mysterious multimillionaire famous for his glittering parties, which he never attends.
One evening, Nick visits his distant relative, Daisy Buchanan, in the posh town of East Egg, where he dines with her and her husband Tom, a former Yale football player whom Nick knows from university. On this occasion, Nick also meets Jordan Baker, an unconventional young woman and golf champion who has known Daisy since childhood. Jordan reveals to Nick that Tom is having an affair with Myrtle Wilson, who lives in the so-called "valley of ashes", a place full of garbage and filth. That same night, Nick catches sight of Gatsby standing alone in his garden, staring at a mysterious green light on the other side of the bay.
A few days later, Nick accompanies Tom, who is drunk and excited, on a train journey to New York. On the way, they stop at a car repair shop run by George Wilson and his wife Myrtle, Tom's mistress. She takes care of the two men and accompanies them to a small New York apartment that Tom has rented for his secret meetings with her. An exuberant party ensues, which ends in violence when Tom punches Myrtle in the face for mentioning Daisy's name.
After a while, Nick receives an invitation to one of Gatsby's big parties, where he feels uncomfortable due to the unfamiliarity of the guests and drinks more than usual. Eventually he meets Jordan. While talking to her, he is approached by a man who turns out to be Jay Gatsby. Gatsby tells him that they both served in the same infantry unit during the war and tries to win Nick's favor. As Nick leaves the party, he notices Gatsby watching him from a distance.
Towards the end of July, Nick and Gatsby meet for dinner at a simple restaurant. During the meal, Gatsby tries to impress Nick with stories of his martial exploits and his time at Oxford University. Nick then meets Jordan again at the Plaza Hotel, where she reveals that Gatsby and Daisy met in 1917. At the time, Gatsby was serving as an officer in the American Expeditionary Forces. The two fell in love, but when Gatsby was transferred abroad, Daisy reluctantly married Tom. Gatsby now hopes that his wealth, flaunted through spectacular parties, will persuade Daisy to reconsider her marriage to Tom. He uses Nick to arrange a meeting with Daisy and the two begin a passionate affair.
In September, Tom finds out about the affair when he observes Daisy treating Gatsby in a careless manner with open displays of affection. Later, Tom and Gatsby have an argument at the Plaza Hotel, where Gatsby demands that Daisy admit that she never loved Tom. But Daisy declares that she loves both Tom and Gatsby, which confuses and disappoints both men. Tom then reveals that Gatsby's fortune stems from illegal dealings in alcohol. After this revelation, Daisy decides to stay with Tom. With disdain, Tom asks Gatsby to drive Daisy home, certain that she will not leave him.
While driving home to East Egg, Gatsby and Daisy get into a tragic accident at Wilson's garage and run over Myrtle, who is killed instantly. Later, Gatsby confesses to Nick that Daisy was driving the car, but that he is prepared to take responsibility for the accident in order to protect her. Although Nick urges Gatsby to flee to avoid arrest, he refuses. Tom tells George, the owner of the garage and Myrtle's husband, that the car she was hit with belongs to Gatsby. The distraught George concludes that the car owner must also be Myrtle's lover and shoots Gatsby in his pool before committing suicide.
Days after Gatsby's death, his father, Henry Gatz, attends the poorly attended funeral. Now that Gatsby is no longer alive, Nick turns his back on New York and realizes that he, like Gatsby, Daisy and Tom, is out of place in the East, as they are all from the Midwest. Tom admits that he pointed George out to Gatsby as the owner of the deadly car. Before Nick returns home, he stands one last time at Gatsby's estate, gazing across the bay at the green light shining at the end of Daisy's pier.
