The Three Musketeers
Alexandre Dumas


"The Three Musketeers" by Alexandre Dumas, is a historical adventure novel that captivates the reader with its rousing plot, charismatic characters and vivid portrayal of the French royal court in the 17th century. The story follows the adventures of young D'Artagnan, who comes to Paris to become a musketeer for the king. He befriends the three musketeers Athos, Porthos and Aramis and becomes embroiled in dangerous intrigues and heroic battles. The novel is famous for its themes of friendship, loyalty, betrayal and justice and weaves historical fact with fictional narrative in a way that is both entertaining and educational.
Summary
In 1625, the young D'Artagnan sets off from his native Gascony and makes his way to Paris to join the famous Musketeers of the Guard. On this journey, he gets into an incident in Meung-sur-Loire with an elderly man who makes derisive remarks about D'Artagnan's horse. Outraged, D'Artagnan challenges the man to a duel, but is overpowered by his companions with kitchen utensils and knocked unconscious, breaking his sword in the process. In addition, a valuable letter of recommendation for Monsieur de Tréville, the leader of the Musketeers, is stolen from him. D'Artagnan desires to take revenge on the older man, who later turns out to be Comte de Rochefort, a henchman of the powerful Cardinal Richelieu. He acts as a courier, transmitting the Cardinal's orders to his spy Milady de Winter, also known as "Milady".
After his arrival in Paris, D'Artagnan goes to the headquarters of the musketeers to meet Monsieur de Tréville, the commander of the troop. As he has lost the letter of recommendation, his request to join Tréville is kindly rejected. Nevertheless, Tréville offers him a letter for an academy for young noblemen in the hope that D'Artagnan can be trained there for future membership of the Musketeers.
While D'Artagnan is with Tréville, he catches sight of Rochefort in the street through the window. In his haste to confront the man who had previously been playing tricks on him, he stumbles over three musketeers, Athos, Porthos and Aramis. In his clumsiness, he insults all three and is promptly challenged to a duel by each of them. So D'Artagnan is suddenly faced with the prospect of having to duel all three experienced fighters in a single afternoon.
When it comes time for the duel with Athos, D'Artagnan realizes that his supporters are Porthos and Aramis, the same musketeers with whom he was also supposed to duel. The three are stunned by the young man who is ready to challenge them all. Before the fight can begin, however, Cardinal Richelieu's guards show up to arrest the illegal duelists. Despite being outnumbered, the four men are victorious. D'Artagnan inflicts serious injuries on Jussac, one of the cardinal's famous officers. King Louis XIII takes note of this and accepts D'Artagnan into the company of Monsieur Des Essart, a company of the King's Guard with a lower rank, in which D'Artagnan must serve for two years before he is given the opportunity to join the musketeers. The king presents him with forty pistols.
D'Artagnan hires a servant named Planchet and finds a place to stay. Soon afterwards, he learns of the kidnapping of his landlord's wife, Constance Bonacieux, with whom he falls in love at first sight when she is released. She serves Queen Anne of France, who has a secret relationship with the English Duke of Buckingham. Although King Louis XIII has given the Queen diamonds, she gives them to her lover as a memento.
Cardinal Richelieu, who is looking for a pretext for a war between France and England, plans to uncover the secret romance. He persuades the king to demand that the queen wear the diamonds she has been given at a soirée organized by the cardinal. Constance asks her husband to travel to London to retrieve the jewels from Buckingham, but he falls victim to Richelieu's manipulation and does not leave. On the dangerous journey to England, during which D'Artagnan and his servant Planchet are repeatedly attacked by the Cardinal's henchmen, there is an incident with de Wardes, an ally of the Cardinal, Rochefort's cousin and Milady's lover. D'Artagnan is forced to attack and almost kill him before he and Planchet finally reach London.
Although two of the diamonds have been stolen by Milady, Buckingham provides replacements so that the jewel set is complete again and prevents Milady from returning to Paris. This enables D'Artagnan to present the entire set to Queen Anne in good time and preserve her honor. As a token of gratitude, he receives a magnificent ring from her. Shortly afterwards, he begins a romance with Madame Bonacieux. At a meeting, he discovers traces of a fight and learns that Constance was attacked and kidnapped by Rochefort on behalf of the Cardinal. D'Artagnan and his friends then return to Paris. There he officially meets Milady de Winter, an agent of the Cardinal, and falls in love with her until her maid reveals her indifference to him. After pretending to be de Wardes in the dark and having his way with Milady, he discovers a branded fleur-de-lis on her shoulder, marking her as a criminal. After Milady discovers his true identity, she tries to kill him, but D'Artagnan escapes.
He is later sent to the siege of La Rochelle. There he learns that the Queen has freed Constance. In an inn, the musketeers overhear the cardinal instructing Milady to kill Buckingham, a supporter of the Protestant rebels in La Rochelle. Richelieu hands her a pardon letter, but Athos manages to get hold of it. The next day, Athos bets that he, D'Artagnan, Porthos, Aramis and their servants can defend the reclaimed bastion of St. Gervais against the rebels for an hour.
The Musketeers and D'Artagnan fight back for an hour and a half, killing 22 Rochellese during this time. D'Artagnan's bravery in this battle leads to his appointment as a musketeer. They warn Lord de Winter and the Duke of Buckingham about Milady. Milady is captured in England, but she seduces her guard, escapes and even persuades him to murder Buckingham. Once in France, Milady hides in the convent where Constance has also found refuge.
The unsuspecting Constance becomes a victim of Milady, who seizes her opportunity to take revenge on D'Artagnan by poisoning Constance. She dies before D'Artagnan can save her. Milady is arrested by the Musketeers and executed by an official executioner. After the execution, the friends return to the siege of La Rochelle, where D'Artagnan is captured by the Cardinal. He presents Milady's pardon letter as his own, and the Cardinal, impressed and secretly relieved at Milady's death, destroys the letter and writes a promotion order to lieutenant in Tréville's musketeer company with an open name.
D'Artagnan offers the letter to his friends Athos, Porthos and Aramis, but each refuses: Athos considers it beneath his dignity, Porthos retires to get married, and Aramis plans to become a priest. Plagued by remorse and grieving, D'Artagnan finally receives the promotion he has been longing for.
