The Sound and the Fury
William Faulkner
"The Sound and the Fury" by William Faulkner is a landmark of experimental literature that chronicles the decline and fall of the Compson family, once-proud Southern aristocrats in Jefferson, Mississippi. The novel is renowned for its complex narrative structure, which is divided into four distinct sections and utilizes the "stream of consciousness" technique to depict the thoughts and feelings that flow randomly through the minds of the characters. Three sections are narrated by the Compson brothers—the mentally disabled Benjy, the tormented Quentin, and the cruel Jason—while the final section is told by an omniscient narrator. Through these fragmented perspectives, Faulkner explores themes of decay, time, memory, and the collapse of traditional Southern values, creating a powerful and haunting portrait of a family's disintegration.
Summary
In the past, the Compsons have been a family of some distinction in the Mississippi town of Jefferson, but they are now in a state of genteel decay. Mr. Jason Compson III is a world-weary cynic married to a Southern lady, Mrs. Carolyn Compson, a hypochondriac who for years has announced that she will soon die. Their first child, Quentin, is a quiet boy who senses the lack of harmony between his parents, and begins at an early age to withdraw into his own mind. Quentin’s sister, Candace—or Caddy, as she is known—is born shortly after him in 1891. As she grows older, she attempts to impose a steadying influence on the household, but she seldom succeeds because she has no role model to follow. Two years later, her brother Jason IV is born—a selfish, greedy boy who quickly becomes a loner. Benjy, born in 1895, is later discovered to be mentally retarded (he is called “the idiot”). He quickly feels the chaos around him and gravitates to the warmth and love provided by Caddy.
As the four children grow older, they revolt against what the family’s world has become. Though the black servant, Dilsey Gibson, and her husband, Roskus—along with their sons, Versh and T. P., and their daughter, Frony—are kind to the Compsons, there is nonetheless an emptiness in the home. Quentin has sexual fantasies about Caddy, but never acts on them. Caddy’s welfare is more important to him than anything else in life—to the point where he feels a kind of emotional (but not physical) incest toward her. Though intelligent, Quentin is also unstable, and because of the hostility that he feels in the home, he lives much of his life in a world of romantic and impractical ideals—honor, glories of the past, and chivalry.
In 1898, the first of many crises occurs when the children’s grandmother, Damuddy, dies—a symbolic indication that the older way of life has begun to disappear. In the same year, while playing down at the branch of the river, Caddy falls in the mud and dirties her drawers. Benjy sees what has happened and begins to cry, sensing that things are not right. At his birth, Benjy had been named “Maury” in honor of Mrs. Compson’s brother, Uncle Maury Bascomb, a worthless parasite who sponges from his sister and who is having an affair with a married woman, Mrs. Patterson. In 1900, when Benjy’s idiocy becomes apparent, Mrs. Compson changes her son’s name to Benjamin so as not to “dishonor” her brother.
Caddy and her sexuality become the focus of the next major crisis. By 1904, Caddy has entered puberty and Benjy perceives changes in her that he does not like. Until this point, he has intuitively sensed that Caddy was pure and virginal because she smelled like a tree. But when Caddy begins wearing perfume and flirting with boys, Benjy feels separated from the one he loves most in life. As she matures, Caddy flirts more and more, and by 1909 she has sex for the first time. From this moment on, Caddy sleeps with every man she meets as a way of revolting against her cynical father and neurotic mother.
In the same year, Mr. Compson sends Quentin to Harvard. For years he has wanted his son to receive the finest education a gentleman can have. To pay for it, he sells the pasture where the children once played, and the new owners turn it into a golf course. Not only does the sale of the pasture reduce the family’s already slim financial resources, but it deprives Benjy of a favorite playing ground. He later becomes enraged when he sees strangers (golfers) walking across “his” pasture, especially when they call “caddie,” which he misinterprets as his sister’s name.
A few months after Quentin leaves for Harvard, Caddy becomes pregnant. The news has a devastating effect on the family. Caddy tells Quentin about it when he returns home for a visit, and it comes as the worst blow of his life, leaving him with the confused feeling that he has somehow failed to protect his sister or to preserve her honor. According to Quentin, Mr. Compson regards the news cynically and without surprise, while Mrs. Compson is deeply concerned about how her own reputation may be affected. Benjy is bewildered by the appearance of Caddy’s sexuality, and Quentin suggests to Caddy that they kill themselves as an act of self-damnation. Caddy seems willing, but Quentin concludes that he is unable to go through with the plan. In an effort to relieve some of the pressure from Caddy, he then suggests that they confess to Mr. Compson that he (Quentin) is the father of Caddy’s child. Caddy seems willing to do this, too, and even agrees to commit incest so as to justify the lie. But it is not clear whether the confession