The Captain of Köpenick
Carl Zuckmayer


"The Captain of Köpenick" is a comedy by Carl Zuckmayer based on true events. The play tells the story of Wilhelm Voigt, a shoemaker with a criminal record, who disguises himself as a captain and takes over the town of Köpenick and its town hall. Through his actions, Voigt exposes the absurdities and weaknesses of Prussian militarism and the German authoritarian state. The play is not only a sharp social critique, but also a humorous and human story about the search for identity and recognition.
Summary
The first part of the play is about the two parallel (and in some places interwoven) stories of Wilhelm Voigt himself and the uniform, which plays a central role in the story. The action takes place in Potsdam, Berlin and Köpenick around 1900. The uniform was originally made by the Jewish tailor Wormser for von Schlettow, the Captain in the Guard Regiment. However, after a scandal in which von Schlettow is arrested by the police in plain clothes when he tries to peacefully settle a bar brawl instigated by a drunken grenadier, von Schlettow is compelled to retire, and the uniform is sent back to Wormser. Finally, the uniform is refitted for Dr. Obermüller, the mayor of Köpenick, for his promotion to captain, but during a celebration the uniform is stained indelibly by an accidental spill and ends up in a rag store.
Wilhelm Voigt, a trained shoemaker who has spent most of his life in prison, is released after another spell in jail and tries to lead an honest life in his advanced age. However, this is destined to fail from the start, as the rigid, militarized society of the late German Empire provides virtually no opportunities for citizens who have not served in the military, as is the case with Voigt. So he gets caught in a vicious circle: without legal registration (a simple passport would suffice) he cannot find work, and without work he cannot get legal registration. In a desperate act, Voigt breaks into a post office to obtain a passport while his friend Kalle targets the money. However, both are apprehended, and Voigt ends up back in prison. During his ten years in Sonnenberg prison, however, he receives formal military training, as the prison warden is a military enthusiast who encourages his inmates to re-enact famous battles from the Franco-Prussian War.
Upon his release from prison, Voigt goes to live with his sister-in-law Marie and brother-in-law Friedrich Hoprecht, taking on the responsibility of caring for their lodger, Liese, a young woman who is ill. One evening, while reading a fairy tale to the girl, Voigt receives an official rejection of his application for a residence permit; this and Liese's death finally prompt him to fight back against the cruel system in which he is trapped. He procures the uniform, whose authority through its appearance and trained military demeanor enables him to recruit a group of grenadiers directly from the street. Voigt takes his team to Köpenick town hall, where he has Obermüller and the entire town council arrested, but is unable to obtain a passport as he had intended (as the passport office is located elsewhere). The "captain" successfully escapes, taking the money from the town treasury with him.
The resulting publicity makes the Captain of Köpenick, as he is known, a folk hero and prankster, but Voigt himself does not enjoy it. A few days later, he goes to the police and offers his help to find the wanted man in exchange for a passport. After he is promised the long-awaited passport, he reveals himself to be the false captain. To prove that it really is him, he reveals where the uniform is hidden. When it is brought in, the criminal director persuades Wilhelm Voigt to slip into the uniform once more for the sake of general amusement. He looks at himself in the mirror and sees himself in this disguise for the first time, whereupon he begins to laugh at his own reflection.
