The War of the Worlds
H. G. Wells


"The War of the Worlds" by H.G. Wells is a groundbreaking science fiction novel that describes the invasion of Earth by Martians. The novel has significantly shaped the science fiction genre and captivates the reader with its gripping plot, visionary concept and intelligent exploration of the themes of conquest, humanity and technological advancement. Wells' ability to create a compelling and terrifying vision of an alien threat has made "The War of the Worlds" a classic and an enduring influence in popular culture.
Summary
The narrator is a well-known writer who from time to time visits his friend, the astronomer Ogilvy, who works at an observatory in the British town of Ottershaw. Together they observe explosions on the surface of Mars at regular intervals, which arouse curiosity in the scientific community.
Later, a flaming, meteor-like object crashes into Horsell Common, near the narrator's house, leaving a large crater at the impact site. Ogilvy is among the first to approach the supposed meteor, which soon turns out to be a strange, gigantic, cylindrical metal object. The group stays at the spot until the evening. A boy is pushed into the crater by the crowd, where the lid of the cylinder comes off, revealing several Martians, octopus-like creatures the size of bears that cannot withstand the Earth's atmosphere and immediately flee back inside. The group retreats and the boy is dragged into the cylinder. The narrator, along with Stent Henderson and Ogilvy himself, approaches the cylinder waving a white flag, but the Martians shoot them with a "heat ray", similar to a laser beam. Nevertheless, the narrator is miraculously not hit and is able to escape home. During the night, green smoke and strange hammering noises emanate from the cylinder.
The next morning, the army surrounds the crater into which the cylinder has fallen, while another falls into the nearby forest. In the morning, the narrator hears machine gun and cannon shots emanating from both fallen cylinders until he sees the forest burning and a bell tower collapsing. He therefore decides to take his wife to the safety of his relatives' house in Leatherhead until the threat is removed. On his return at night, however, he discovers that the suburbs are deserted but untouched until he comes face to face with three giant three-legged fighting machines, the "Tripods", built by the Martians the night before. Armed with heat rays and a strange, toxic black smoke, they easily defeated the surrounding army and then attacked the nearby cities. While trying to escape the Tripods, the narrator commits a careless act, causing the chariot he was riding in to overturn and break the horse's neck. He flees into a ditch and over a wooded hill, towards which the Martians are heading, in the direction of his home.
On his return, the narrator looks out of the window of his study and is confronted with an apocalyptic scenario: on the left, Woking, destroyed down to the station; in the middle, the vanished trees and the shadows of the Tripods in the distance; on the right, the heath, a destroyed train, a bell tower and fields in flames. Looking outside, the narrator encounters a retreating artilleryman entering his garden. The soldier informs him that another Martian cylinder has landed between Woking and Leatherhead, obstructing the narrator's path to his wife. The two try to escape but are separated on the Thames, where a large crowd tries to board a ferry to get away. One of the Tripods emerges, but is shot down by British artillery, and parts of the damaged laser cannon fall into the river, which boils over. Meanwhile, others, including the narrator, attempt to cross the Thames by boat to the Middlesex region while the Martians retreat.
More Martian cylinders fall over southern England and total panic breaks out in London. The narrator's brother escapes on a boat after London is shrouded in black smoke. The torpedo boat Thunderbolt manages to shoot down two tripods before it sinks. Nevertheless, the narrator's brother manages to land on the European mainland together with two traveling companions he has met on the way.
Soon after, all military resistance is broken and the Tripods now roam everywhere, capturing humans to feed on their blood. A strange reddish clover plant resembling heather covers the landscape and damages Earth's ecology, a sign that the Martians have begun a terraforming operation to make Earth resemble their own planet.
The narrator, who has now found refuge in a ruined building on the banks of the Thames, meets a curate who has been driven mad by the trauma of the invasion. He is convinced that the Martians are satanic creatures who have come to herald Armageddon. In the days that follow, the narrator and the curate wander to an abandoned house where another cylinder crashes nearby, allowing them to spy on what the Martians are doing for a few days. The narrator desperately tries to calm the curate down so as not to attract the tripods. But one day the curate comes out shouting evangelic exclamations, and the narrator is forced to knock him unconscious and hide in the charcoal pile while the curate's body is dragged away by the Martians. Later, the narrator travels to the center of London. There he finds the retired artillerist, who is suffering from schizophrenia and digs a hole to realize his plans for the future resistance, which was to take place in the basement of the city. The narrator then abandons the soldier to his delusions.
The narrator finally decides to kill himself by heading towards the tripods. To his surprise, however, he discovers that the Martians, along with the red plant, have died from bacteria in the Earth's atmosphere to which humans are immune. The humans begin to repopulate the land and the Earth's climate returns to normal. At the end, the narrator returns to his homeland, where he reunites with his wife, who he thought was dead.
