The Call of the Wild
Jack London


"The Call of the Wild" by Jack London is a gripping adventure novel that captivates the reader with its intense depiction of the wilderness and the relationship between man and beast. The story follows Buck the dog, who is whisked away from his comfortable life in California and transported to the brutal and icy world of the Alaskan gold rush, where he is employed as a sled dog. As Buck faces the challenges of the harshest nature, he discovers his primal instincts and his connection to the wilderness.
Summary
In 1897, Buck, a powerful St. Bernard–Scotch Shepherd mix weighing 140 pounds (63 kg), lives pampered with Judge Miller and his family in California's Santa Clara Valley. One evening he is kidnapped by the assistant gardener Manuel, who sells him to a stranger to pay off his gambling debts. Buck is shipped to Seattle, where he is locked in a crate, starved and subjected to violence. When he is finally released, he attacks his tormentor, who tries to condition him through intimidation. After Buck shows obedience, the man treats him kindly.
Soon after, Buck is bought by French-Canadian government officials François and Perrault, who transport him to Alaska. There he is trained as a sled dog for the Klondike region in Canada. Alongside Buck, François and Perrault add ten other dogs to their team. From his fellow canines, Buck learns the essentials of surviving in the harsh wilderness and how to navigate the pack's hierarchy. During the following weeks on the trail, a fierce rivalry develops between Buck and the lead dog Spitz, an aggressive white husky. Buck eventually defeats and kills Spitz and takes over his position as leader.
After François and Perrault have completed the Yukon Trail in record time and brought their dispatches back to Skagway, they receive new instructions from the Canadian government and sell their sled dogs to a man who works in the postal service. The dogs are now used for long, exhausting trips to transport heavy loads to the mining areas. During these arduous journeys, Buck has visions of a dog foreman living alongside a primitive "hairy man". The strain of the work wears on the animals, and the grumpy husky Dave falls terminally ill and ends up being shot.
The dogs are too exhausted and injured to be of any further service, which is why the letter carrier sells them to three stamp collectors from the American South: the vain Mercedes, her reserved husband Charles and her haughty brother Hal. The three are completely inexperienced in the northern wilderness, struggle with sledding and pay no attention to helpful hints from others - especially warnings about the risky spring thaw. After being advised that their sled is too heavy, Mercedes decides to ditch vital supplies in favor of fashionable accessories. Unfortunately, she and Hal decide to lead a 14-strong dog team in the mistaken belief that this will get them ahead faster. The dogs are first overfed and then overworked, and starve to death when the food runs out. Along the way, most of the dogs die, with only Buck and four others surviving when they reach the White River.
They meet John Thornton, an experienced wilderness man, who notices the terrible condition of the dogs. Despite Thornton's warning not to cross the ice, the trio continue on their way. Buck, aware of the danger, refuses to move on. After a brutal whipping by Hal, an outraged Thornton steps in, frees Buck and beats Hal. The sledge breaks through the ice along with the people and the remaining dogs and they drown in the river.
Under Thornton's tender care, Buck recovers and develops a deep affection for him. He defends Thornton by killing a violent man named Burton who had attacked Thornton, gaining respect in the region. He also rescues Thornton from a river. While Thornton is prospecting in the gold fields, he makes a bet with a wealthy prospector, Mr. Matthewson, about Buck's strength and loyalty. Buck manages to move a sledge half a meter (1,6 feet) deep in the ice with half a ton of flour and pull it 91 meters (298 feet), winning Thornton 1,600 US dollars in gold dust. An interested party offers Thornton a lot of money for Buck (first 700, then 1,200 US dollars), but Thornton refuses firmly and rudely.
Thornton pays off his debts with the winnings and then decides to search for a legendary lost gold mine together with his companions Pete and Hans, the faithful sled dog Buck and six other dogs. After discovering a rich vein of gold, the dogs realize they have run out of things to do. While Thornton and his friends dedicate themselves to digging for gold, Buck feels a stronger connection to the wilderness and explores the surrounding area, where he strikes up a friendship with a local wolf. Although he doesn't join the wolves, he keeps returning to Thornton, torn between civilization and the wilderness, unable to find a clear place.
On one return to camp, Buck discovers that the Indian Yeehats have murdered Thornton, Hans, Pete and the other dogs. In a rage, Buck kills some of the attackers to avenge his beloved human friend. Afterwards, he realizes that he no longer has any human ties that bind him to civilization. In search of the wolf he has befriended, he encounters a hostile pack of wolves, fights them and triumphs. He discovers that his wolf friend is a member of this pack. Buck joins the pack and merges with the wilderness for good.
The legend of Buck, the "Ghost Dog" of the North, spreads among the Native Americans in Alaska and Northwest Canada. Every year, on the anniversary of his attack on the Yeehats, Buck returns to the place where he was last with Thornton to express his grief. Each winter, he leads the wolf pack and takes revenge on the Yeehats in memory of the men he once loved.
