The Magic Mountain
Thomas Mann


"The Magic Mountain" by Thomas Mann, first published in 1924, is a monumental work of modern literature characterized by its profound discussion of time, illness, death, and philosophical and political ideas. The novel is set in a sanatorium in the Swiss Alps, where the young Hans Castorp originally intended to spend only three weeks to visit his sick cousin. Instead, however, he stays there for seven years. This forced interruption to his planned life becomes a metaphorical journey into the depths of the human psyche and the European cultural crisis before the First World War.
Summary
The arrival
Hans Castorp, the only offspring of a Hamburg merchant family, grows up with his grandfather after the loss of his parents. After his grandfather also dies, he is sent to live with his uncle Tienappel. Castorp eventually decides to become a shipbuilding engineer so that he can work for the local port company. Before that, however, he takes a trip to the international sanatorium "Berghof", where his cousin Joachim Ziemssen is staying. Castorp has planned to stay there for three weeks, but this stay will ultimately last seven years. The sanatorium, which is run by the psychoanalyst Dr. Krokowski and the Dr. Behrens, exerts a certain attraction on Castorp; life on the mountain fascinates him. The patients there seem to have strange habits.
Mr. Settembrini
Lodovico Settembrini is an Italian humanist and freemason. He advocates the principles of individualistic democracy. Hans Castorp and Settembrini soon become friends and get on well discussing philosophical and political issues. Settembrini reminds Castrop of an organ grinder because of his gestures and his worn-out clothes.
Madame Chauchat
Clawdia Chauchat is a 28-year-old Russian woman. She reminds Hans Castorp of Pribislav Hippe, a schoolmate from whom he once borrowed a pencil. Madame Chauchat comes from a wealthy family from Dagestan in the Caucasus. Although she is married, she does not wear a wedding ring. At dinner in the sanatorium, she always attracts attention by arriving late and slamming the door. Castorp is very interested in this fellow inmate and has his dinner companion, Miss Engelhart, tell him all about her. Castorp falls in love with her and becomes jealous of Dr. Behrens, who has painted a portrait of Madame Chauchat. Settembrini advises Castorp not to get too involved with her.
During the carnival party at the sanatorium, Hans Castorp asks Clawdia Chauchat if she could lend him a pencil for a game they are working on. Here, too, a connection is made with his schoolmate Hippe. She tells Hans that she wants to travel to Dagestan again the next day. They then talk in French and Hans Castorp tells her that he loves her. Later in the novel, Hans tells Mr. Peeperkorn that he was Clawdia's lover that night. The novel leaves open whether this was actually the case. Hans Castorp begins to get used to everyday life in the sanatorium.
The time in the sanatorium
Because of the routine of everyday life in the sanatorium, time passes faster and faster for Hans Castorp and he perceives it differently. Although Castorp considers himself healthy, Dr. Behrens does not allow him to leave the sanatorium. In order to combat his illness, Castrop also adopts the habits of the sanatorium residents, such as taking a recumbent cure. Adriatica von Mylendonk, the head nurse, sells him a clinical thermometer so that he can check his temperature like the other residents. An X-ray examination reveals that Hans Castorp has a damp spot near his lung, which prevents him from leaving the sanatorium for the time being.
Hans Castorp, who has become accustomed to life in the sanatorium, becomes increasingly alienated from life in the country. In addition to attending Dr. Krokowski's lectures on love and illness, Hans also studies a little medicine and psychology with the help of books he acquires.
Naphta
Settembrini, a terminally ill man who sees no way out of the sanatorium, decides to leave the "Berghof" and live in Davos. There he lives in the attic room of a grocer. However, another room in the house is rented out to Mr. Settembrini's intellectual counterpart, the Jesuit Naphta. This originally Jewish man from Galicia later converted to Catholicism. Naphta is also highly intelligent and rhetorically gifted. Settembrini, the man with the enlightened ideas, tries to protect Hans Castorp, who has to some extent become his protégé, from the ideas of his opponent Naphta, who is nevertheless a friend. Naphta is striving for a religious society of brotherhood.
Joachim's departure and death
Because Joachim Ziemssen wants to join the army and is not dismissed by Dr. Behrens, he turns his back on the sanatorium and leaves without permission. Hans Castorp simply stays at the "Berghof". After a few months, Joachim returns severely weakened. Shortly after his arrival at the sanatorium, he dies. However, during a spiritualist session described later in the book, Joachim's spirit is conjured up from the realm of the dead and Hans Castorp is able to perceive him.
Hans Castorp's "blizzard dream"
During a skiing trip in the high mountains around the sanatorium, Hans Castorp gets lost in the snow and is caught in a life-threatening snowstorm. To get to safety from the driving snow, he has to seek the shelter of a hayloft and wait there until the storm subsides. Exhausted by his efforts, Castorp falls asleep against the wall. In his "blizzard dream", he sees a beautiful castle inhabited by young people who greet each other in a reverent and friendly manner. He also sees two witches eating a small child.
When Castorp half wakes up, he compares his dreams and comes to the conclusion that there is a middle ground in the dispute between Naphta and Settembrini. He doubts their positions and the opposition between death and life, sickness and health and spirit and nature. The human being is of higher value than the aforementioned opposites, precisely because they arise through human existence. Man should not allow death to dominate his thoughts, but rather concentrate on goodness and love. This is the conclusion that Hans Castorp draws and by which he will live. However, he soon forgets this after escaping the snowstorm.
Mr. Peeperkorn
Clawdia Chauchat also returns to the Swiss sanatorium, but accompanied by her lover, the Dutch coffee planter Mynheer Pieter Peeperkorn. Although Castorp is a little jealous, he is very impressed by the lively Dutchman. He even considers it an honor to have this man at Clawdia's side. Peeperkorn drinks a lot of wine, experiments with quinine, snake venom and drugs. He does not have the same rhetorical skills as Settembrini and Naphta; he often does not even manage to finish his sentences. Peeperkorn finally dies by suicide with snake venom after being severely weakened and losing his strength and zest for life. Madame Chauchat then leaves the "Berghof" for good.
Final stage
At the end of the book, the inhabitants of the sanatorium begin to get bored and occupy themselves with banal things such as collecting stamps, taking photographs and eating chocolate. Hans Castorp is fascinated by the new gramophone he has bought. He often listens to it, especially Schubert's "The lime tree".
The argument between Naphta and Settembrini, which is initially settled with words, eventually escalates into a duel with weapons. Out of doubt and anger, Naphta shoots himself in the head during this duel.
The originally planned three weeks that Hans Castorp was to spend in the sanatorium eventually turned into seven years. The outbreak of the First World War causes many inhabitants to pack their bags, including Hans Castorp. However, his journey takes him into a completely different world. He goes to war, and the reader observes Castorp as a soldier on the battlefield on the Western Front. After a while, the narrator, and therefore the reader, loses sight of Hans Castorp. It remains unclear whether Castorp survived the war. 
