The Physicists
Friedrich Dürrenmatt


Friedrich Dürrenmatt's "The Physicists" is a fascinating play that makes viewers and readers alike think and smile. It is one of the best-known and most frequently performed German-language dramas and combines elements of the grotesque, comedy and tragedy to address fundamental questions of ethics in science and the responsibility of the individual towards society. The plot revolves around three seemingly insane inmates of a psychiatric institution who pretend to be physicists. However, it soon becomes clear that they are not crazy at all, but are hiding a well-kept secret.
Summary
The action takes place in the salon of the sanatorium Les Cerisiers, a psychiatric institution for the mentally ill run by the doctor and psychologist Mathilde von Zahnd. The main room in which the play takes place is connected to three other rooms, each of which is occupied by a patient. These three men, who are all "physicists" by profession, are allowed to use the lounge, where they are monitored and controlled by the nurses. Herbert Georg Beutler is the first patient, who is convinced that he is Sir Isaac Newton. The second patient, Ernst Heinrich Ernesti, believes himself to be Albert Einstein and the third patient, Johann Wilhelm Möbius, is firmly convinced that he receives regular visits from the biblical King Solomon. In reality, "Sir Isaac Newton" and "Albert Einstein" are spies from different sides of the Cold War.
At the beginning of the play, the audience learns that "Einstein" has just killed one of his nurses and the police are investigating the crime scene. The "Inspector" constantly questions Miss Mathilde von Zahnd and indirectly insults the "mentally ill" patients.
In the course of the conversation, it emerges that this is the second murder of a nurse by one of the three patients in just three months. The first murder was committed by "Newton", which, as it later transpires, was due to the nurse discovering the true identity of "Newton".
The motives for the two murders become clearer in the second act of the play, where it is revealed with startling acuity that not even one of the three patients is actually mad, but that they are all just pretending to be mad for various reasons.
Möbius is in fact an incredibly brilliant physicist whose discoveries include such legendary results as the solution to the gravitation problem, a "Unified Theory of Elementary Particles" and the "Principle of Universal Discovery". Fearing what mankind might do with these powerful discoveries, he feigned madness in the hope of being committed to an asylum for the mentally ill and thus protected along with his knowledge.
However, he was unable to avoid the attention he feared so much. "Einstein" and "Newton" are spies from two different countries who sneaked into Les Cerisiers under false identities in order to obtain Möbius' documents and, if possible, Möbius himself. Each spy had to murder a nurse to protect his secrets, reinforce his simulation of madness and further disguise his identity.
In the final scene of the drama, the three men reveal their secrets, with each of the two spies struggling to convince Möbius to join them. However, Möbius succeeds in convincing them that the secrets he has uncovered are too terrible for humanity to reveal. He makes it clear that their attempts to win him over are useless, as he has recently burned all the documents he wrote during his stay in the sanatorium. After long discussions, the three men finally agree that they are content to protect humanity by spending the rest of their lives in captivity, advancing and serving physics.
These noble plans are quickly changed by the play's final twist: Miss Doctor Mathilde von Zahnd enters the room and reveals to the three men that she has overheard their entire conversation. She also admits that she has known about Möbius for years and has secretly copied his documents. She reveals that she has used his scientific discoveries to build an international empire that she will later rule. She is convinced that King Solomon is communicating with her and, with his guidance along with Möbius' discoveries, she can rise to become the most powerful woman in the world.
The drama ends with an atmosphere of approaching disaster. Möbius, "Newton" and "Einstein" have been tricked and are trapped. The play ends with each of the men addressing the audience and emphasizing their plight and that of humanity as a whole. In their eyes, humanity is lost and cannot be saved.
