The Brothers Karamazov
Fyodor Dostoyevsky


"The Brothers Karamazov", Fyodor Dostoyevsky's last and perhaps greatest novel, is a profound literary masterpiece that explores psychological, philosophical and theological themes and captivates the reader with its epic plot, deep characters and exploration of moral dilemmas. The novel tells the story of the dysfunctional Karamazov family, including the father Fyodor Pavlovich and his four very different sons. It is a story of murder, faith, doubt and redemption that delves into the deepest abysses of human passions and convictions.
Summary
Part One
Fyodor Karamazov, a small landowner, married the rich and noble Adelaida Miusov, who soon despised him and fled to St. Petersburg, where she eventually died. She left behind her son Dmitri, whom Karamazov largely ignored. Dmitri was initially raised by his servant Grigory, but was taken away by his mother's relatives at the age of four. Shortly afterwards, Karamazov married again, to Sofia, a parentless ward of a general's widow. After the birth of two more sons, Ivan and Alexei, Sofia also died. The children were initially raised by the general's daughter and later by her heir, Efim Polenov. Dmitri dropped out of grammar school and served in the Caucasus, Ivan drew attention to himself through his studies and a religious article, and Alexei entered a monastery at the age of twenty to live with Father Zosima, the Elder.
Fyodor Karamazov, Ivan and Pyotr Miusov arrive at Zosima's hermitage at the end of August. Dmitri is late. Alyosha comes out with Zosima. Fyodor Pavlovich behaves like a buffoon, constantly telling stories and jokes and begging for forgiveness. Zosima leaves them and goes to the assembled women, listens to their stories and blesses them. On the way back, he talks to Chochlakova, a small landowner whose daughter Lisa feels better after his prayers. At this time, Ivan's religious article is being discussed in the cell. Dmitri appears. A quarrel immediately breaks out between him and his father over Dmitri's mother's inheritance and the favor of the same woman (Grushenka). Zosima stops him and they all part. At the monastery, where everyone is invited to dinner, another scandal breaks out, this time between Fyodor Karamazov and Pyotr Miusov.
Only they and Ivan live in Karamazov's house. The servants, old Grigory and his wife and their adopted son Pavel Smerdyakov also live in the house next door. Pavel was the son of the city fool Lizaveta Smerdyakova, who died at birth, and it is rumored that he is Fyodor Karamazov's illegitimate son. Grigory noticed his peculiarities as a child and later sent him to Moscow to train as a cook, from where he returned to serve Karamazov. Dmitri intercepts Alyosha on the way to his father's house and tells him the story of saving Katerina's father out of love for her and of his love for Grushenka. He asks Alyosha to explain everything to Katerina Ivanovna, a young aristocrat, and also confesses to her that he has stolen three thousand roubles from her. At the Karamazovs' house, Fyodor, Ivan, Alexei (Alyosha), Smerdyakov and Grigory argue about religion, whereupon the father, alone with his sons, contemplates immortality. Dmitri, who bursts in looking for Grushenka, beats up his father. Alyosha goes to Katerina Ivanovna, where he also sees Grushenka. A scuffle breaks out between the two women. Alyosha passes on Dmitri's words and receives a letter from Lisa in which she confesses her love for him.
Part Two
Father Zosima is on the brink of death. Alyosha visits his father again, who is doing better. On the way to Chochlakova, a boy in the street throws stones at him and bites him without telling him why. At Chochlakova's, Alyosha tells Lisa about her letter. In the drawing room, Katerina Ivanovna tells him and Ivan that she will always love Dmitri. She asks Alyosha to give two hundred roubles to the retired staff captain Snegiryov, who has suffered because of Dmitri. Snegiryov does not accept the money. It turns out that the boy who threw stones at Alyosha is Snegiryov's son Ilya, who has seen Dmitri publicly tugging at his father's beard.
On his return to Chochlakova, Alyosha tells him that he will soon be leaving the monastery and promises to call Lisa his name in future. Afterwards, while searching for Dmitri, he overhears Smerdyakov making critical remarks about the landlords and Dmitri in particular. Instead of Dmitri, Alyosha finds Ivan in the inn.
He leaves the next day and wants to get to know his brother better before his departure. Ivan tries to explain his views on life and religion by reciting his poem "The Grand Inquisitor", whereupon Alyosha defines Ivan's position as "everything is permitted" and describes this as rebellion. Ivan meets Smerdyakov at his father's house. He tells him that he is worried about a possible murder in the conflict between Dmitri and his father. Ivan realizes that Dmitri could actually kill his father, but travels to Moscow anyway.
On his return to Zosima's monastery cell, Alyosha manages to record his last conversation with the elder. He talks about his childhood, the cadet corps, the service and a duel over a girl in which he forgave his rival, after which he went to the monastery, and about the rest of his life. The old man also left behind some teachings about monks, masters and servants, prayer, love, other worlds, faith and hellfire.
Part Three
After the death of old Zosima, Alexei is upset that he "stank", which should not have happened to the saint. Rakitin, a seminary student and supposed friend of Alyosha, meets him and takes him to Grushenka. She tells him that her Polish fiancé has returned and is waiting for her in the village of Mokroe. Alexei then returns briefly to the monastery, prays and leaves the monastery in accordance with the deceased saint's command to "remain in peace".
Dmitri tries to get money by selling his father's wood, but it is not bought. Then he tries to borrow three thousand roubles from Chochlakova, but she has no such sums. In search of Grushenka, Dmitri goes to his father's house in the dark. At the sight of Fyodor Pavlovich, he thinks of murder. Later, as he runs away, he hits the servant Grigory on the head with a pestle. When Dmitri returns with blood and money, he learns from the servants that Grushenka has gone to Mokroe. After buying food and champagne, Dmitri goes there and joins Grushenka's company. During a game of cards, Grushenka discovers that her fiancé does not love her. He is chased away and a feast is organized.
The sudden appearance of a large sum of money and blood on Dmitri's hands arouse suspicion. At the Karamazovs' house, they find Fyodor Pavlovich murdered and with his head bashed in. They suspect Dmitri, whom they follow to Mokroe and order a preliminary investigation. Dmitri confirms that he beat Grigory, who eventually survived, but does not confess to killing his father. After a long interrogation, he admits that he stole money from Katerina Ivanovna a long time ago, but did not spend it immediately. He is not believed, arrested and taken away.
Part Four
Ilyusha, a local schoolboy, kills a dog with a bread pin, then his father is dragged by his beard by Dmitri Karamazov. After the attack on Alexei, Ilyusha is much worse off. The thirteen-year-old socialist Kolya convinces him that the dog is still alive. The doctor arrives and tells him that without expensive treatment, which they cannot afford, Ilyusha will most likely die. Later, the boy dies.
Before the trial, Alyosha visits Grushenka, Chochlakova and Lisa, Ivan and Dmitri in prison. Lisa no longer loves him. Ivan looks ill, so Alyosha tries to convince him that he is not responsible for his father's death. Ivan has already visited Smerdyakov twice, who speaks to him in riddles and alludes to Ivan's involvement in his father's death. After the meeting with Alyosha, Ivan visits Smerdyakov again, who openly confesses to him the murder of Fyodor Karamazov. The night before the trial, Smerdyakov hangs himself.
At the trial, Katerina, Grushenka and Alyosha testify in Dmitri's favor. Ivan appears and blames Smerdyakov and himself for the murder. Katerina now loves Ivan more than Dmitri and presents a note in which the drunken Dmitri threatens to kill his father if he needs money. The public prosecutor accuses Dmitri of murdering his father, and lawyer Fetyukovich tries to defend him. As a result, the jury finds Dmitri fully guilty of murder and sentences him to twenty years' hard labor in Siberia. Katerina promises to organise an escape.
