The Taming of the Shrew
William Shakespeare
"The Taming of the Shrew" is an Elizabethan comedy in which a forceful young man uses all his skill and energy to transform a bitter “shrew” into a loving, obedient wife. The play is based on the perversely sexist concept of women as objects to be manipulated by men, and the modern reader will likely have a different reaction to it than the audiences of Shakespeare’s time.

Summary
The play begins with an introductory act, or "Induction," where a drunken tinker named Christopher Sly becomes the victim of an elaborate practical joke. After passing out, Sly is taken to the home of a rich, mischievous Lord who has him placed in a magnificent bedroom and waited upon by servants. The Lord hopes to convince the tinker that he is a nobleman who has been in a coma for 15 years. The Lord also employs a group of traveling actors in his deception by having them perform a play for Sly. The tinker awakes and soon believes he is a lord, especially when he discovers he has a pretty “wife” (actually the Lord’s young page boy in disguise). Sly then settles in to enjoy the actors’ comedy about the taming of a shrew.

The play-within-a-play opens in the northern Italian city of Padua, where Lucentio, a young man from Pisa accompanied by his servant Tranio, has come to study at the university. They witness the wealthy Baptista Minola with his two daughters, Katherina and Bianca. Baptista informs Bianca's two suitors, Gremio and Hortensio, that no one can marry her until her older sister Katherina, the shrew, is wed. The suitors despair, knowing Katherina’s hot temper and acid tongue make her a poor prospect for marriage.
Lucentio, however, has fallen instantly in love with the quiet, pretty Bianca. He devises a plan to disguise himself as a teacher named "Cambio" to gain access to her in Baptista’s house. Tranio will disguise himself as Lucentio and become a formal suitor to Bianca.
Meanwhile, Petruchio, a gentleman from Verona, arrives in Padua with his servant Grumio, seeking a wealthy wife. He visits his friend Hortensio, who suggests Katherina. Attracted by her large dowry and fascinated by accounts of her high spirits, Petruchio decides to wed her immediately. Hortensio sees an opportunity and decides to disguise himself as a music teacher, "Licio," to get close to Bianca, asking Petruchio to present him to Baptista. They are joined by Gremio and the disguised Lucentio ("Cambio"), as well as the disguised Tranio ("Lucentio"), who also declares his intention to woo Bianca.

At Baptista’s house, Katherina shows bitter jealousy, tying Bianca to a chair and tormenting her. After Baptista separates them, the group of suitors arrives. Petruchio states his intention to marry Katherina and presents Hortensio ("Licio") as a music tutor. Gremio presents "Cambio" as a teacher for Bianca, and Tranio ("Lucentio") gives Baptista books and a lute. When the tutors are sent in, "Licio" quickly returns with the lute broken over his head by Katherina. Intrigued, Petruchio resolves to tame her by turning her insults into compliments. The two engage in a furious battle of wits until Petruchio abruptly declares he will marry her. Despite Katherina’s protests, Petruchio informs everyone they will be married the following Sunday and leaves town to buy wedding clothes. Gremio and Tranio ("Lucentio") then bid for Bianca, with Tranio winning by promising his father Vincentio's great wealth as assurance.

Both "Cambio" and "Licio" use their lessons to court Bianca. "Cambio" reveals his true identity as Lucentio, and Bianca admits she loves him. Hortensio also reveals his identity, but Bianca rejects him. On the wedding day, Petruchio arrives late, dressed in a bizarre and ugly costume. He dismisses Baptista's concerns, claiming, "To me she's married, not unto my clothes." He continues his outrageous behavior through the ceremony, swearing loudly, knocking down the priest, and kissing Katherina loudly. As a final humiliation, he forces her to leave with him before the wedding feast.

Katherina and Petruchio arrive at his home in Verona after an exhausting journey. Petruchio proceeds to abuse the servants and throws out the dinner, falsely claiming the meat was overcooked. He keeps Katherina awake all night without food, confessing to the audience his plan "to kill a wife with kindness." In Padua, Hortensio gives up on Bianca after seeing her with "Cambio." Meanwhile, Tranio enlists an old traveling teacher, the Pedant, to disguise himself as Vincentio to trick Baptista into agreeing to Lucentio's marriage to Bianca. The "taming" of Katherina continues in Verona as Petruchio sends back a new hat and dress, claiming the perfectly fine garments are poorly made. He then refuses to journey back to Padua until Katherina agrees with him that it is 7:00 A.M., when it is actually 2:00 P.M. In Padua, Tranio ("Lucentio") introduces the Pedant ("Vincentio") to Baptista, and the marriage is approved. The real Lucentio then plans to elope with Bianca.

Petruchio and Katherina finally set off for Padua. Their journey is nearly halted when Petruchio praises the beauty of the moon, which Katherina correctly identifies as the sun. Realizing that obedience is more important than winning the argument, she finally gives in to her husband. Her new obedience is further proven when they encounter the real Vincentio, and she agrees with Petruchio that the old man is a comely young woman. After explaining their game, they inform Vincentio of his son's impending marriage and set off for Padua together.

As the undisguised Lucentio and Bianca sneak off to be wed, Petruchio, Katherina, and the real Vincentio arrive at Lucentio’s house. They are refused entry by the Pedant, still pretending to be Vincentio, who accuses the real one of being a fraud. The real Lucentio arrives, identifies his father, and explains the whole deception as Tranio and the Pedant flee. A feast is held for the newlyweds, at which Hortensio’s new wife, the Widow, calls Katherina a “shrew.” After a brief argument, the three wives leave, and Petruchio bets Lucentio and Hortensio that his wife is the most obedient. Bianca claims she is busy, and Hortensio’s wife tells him to come to her. Only Katherina comes when summoned. She then fetches the other two women and lectures them that “Thy husband is thy lord, thy life, thy keeper.” Placing her hand under Petruchio’s boot, she indicates he has the right to step on it. Proud and gratified, Petruchio kisses her instead. The play ends with no further reference to the tinker, Christopher Sly.