The Old Man and the Sea
Ernest Hemingway


"The Old Man and the Sea" by Ernest Hemingway is a captivating and timeless tale for which Hemingway was awarded the Pulitzer Prize for Literature in 1953. This slim but powerful work tells the story of Santiago, an aged Cuban fisherman who, after a long run of bad luck, becomes embroiled in an epic battle with a giant marlin in the Gulf Stream. The book is famous for its simple narrative, profound subject matter and symbolic meaning that goes beyond the mere act of fishing.
Summary
Santiago is an elderly and experienced fisherman who has not made a catch for over two months. The people around him consider him "salao", which figuratively means extremely unlucky or cursed. A young man named Manolin, whom Santiago introduced to the fishing industry, has been sent by his parents to a more successful boat, but he remains close to the old fisherman. Manolin helps Santiago by carrying his fishing gear, preparing food and talking about baseball with him in the evenings, in particular discussing Santiago's favorite player, Joe DiMaggio. Santiago plans to turn his luck around by going out far on the Gulf Stream to fish.
The next day, the eighty-fifth day of his dry spell, Santiago sets out early and ends up making an impressive catch - a marlin. However, the fish is strong and Santiago cannot pull it into the boat straight away. Instead, he has to hold the fishing line with his hands and back, fearing that tying the line might tear it. The fight with the marlin lasts two full days and nights, during which Santiago eats very little food and hardly sleeps. He catches smaller fish to eat while the marlin drags him further out to sea. He even feels a kind of brotherhood with the fish and admires its strength and beauty.
On the third day, the marlin gets tired and begins to circle the boat. Santiago, himself on the verge of exhaustion, takes the opportunity to reel in the fishing line and harpoon the marlin, killing it in the process. The huge fish cannot be lifted into the boat, so Santiago ties it to the side. Thinking of the profit the marlin will bring him and the people he can feed with it, Santiago makes his way home.
The dead marlin on Santiago's boat attracts sharks, and its trail of blood in the water entices them to come closer. Santiago curses his decision to go so far out to sea. The first large mako shark that approaches bites into the marlin before Santiago kills it with his harpoon, which he loses in the process. To defend himself, Santiago attaches his knife to an oar to make an improvised spear. He uses it to kill more sharks, but the knife breaks and he has to knock down two sharks with the blunt end. With each shark attack, the Marlin's condition deteriorates further as the bites increase the flow of blood.
During the night, a swarm of sharks attacks the boat and Santiago desperately fights back. When his improvised spear breaks, he uses the tiller of his boat as a weapon. When a shark even attacks the marlin's head, Santiago realizes that the fish is lost, and he accuses the sharks of having destroyed his hopes and dreams.
The next morning, Santiago reaches the mainland exhausted. He drags himself to his hut and leaves the remains of the marlin by his boat before falling into a deep sleep. Manolin finds him the next day and is so moved that he cries. In the meantime, other fishermen have discovered the huge marlin and measure it; it is over five meters (16 feet) long. They express their regret to Manolin for Santiago. Meanwhile, a couple of tourists mistake the dead fish for a shark.
After Santiago wakes up from his sleep, he gives the marlin's head to a fisherman friend called Pedrico. He and Manolin decide to go fishing together again. Santiago falls asleep again with happy memories of his youth and dreams of lions on a beach in Africa.
