The Broken Jug
Heinrich von Kleist


"The Broken Jug" by Heinrich von Kleist is a masterpiece of German theater, characterized by its comedic elements and psychological depth. The play is a comedy set in a village courtroom, where the village judge Adam is trying the case of a broken jug. During the trial, a complex story of guilt, deceit and human weakness unfolds. The plot takes place over the course of one day and is a mixture of crime comedy and courtroom drama.
Summary
In the small Dutch town of Huisum, the judge Adam is surprised by his secretary Licht while dressing a wound on his leg when Licht enters Adam's house in the morning. Licht also notices a conspicuous wound on Adam's face. Adam explains that he sustained these injuries when he fell out of bed in the morning and hit his head against the fireplace. Light also notices Adam's club foot.
Licht informs Adam that Walter, a judicial councilor traveling the country to review the finances and procedures of the municipal courts, will be arriving today to scrutinize Adam's court. Light also tells of a judge in a neighboring town who tried to commit suicide after Walter found problems at the courthouse. In addition, today is court day and no one can find Adam's wig. Adam's maid insists that Adam came home the night before without his wig.
When Walter arrives, he insists that Adam begin the day's proceedings immediately. The parties are the plaintiff Marthe, a widowed farmer's wife, who is present with her daughter Eve, and the defendant Ruprecht, Eve's fiancé, who is accompanied by his father Veit. Before the trial, Eve tries to speak to Ruprecht, but he rejects her and insults her as a whore. Adam also speaks to the parties before the trial, especially Eve, and seems to want to influence her testimony. Walter admonishes Adam and urges him to begin the official trial immediately.
As the trial begins, the enraged Marthe accuses Ruprecht of destroying an ornately painted water jug. The jug had a rich family history and great emotional value to her. It is thought that Marthe's disappointment at Ruprecht's treatment of Eve also contributes to her anger. Marthe claims to have found Ruprecht in Eve's room last night, where the door had been broken open and the jug smashed. She also explains that Eve accused Ruprecht of breaking the jug.
Upon being asked to provide an explanation, Ruprecht states that he broke into Eve's home and overheard her conversing with someone in her room. He suspects that the interlocutor was a man called Lebrecht, who had previously shown an interest in Eve. When Adam learns of Lebrecht's presumed presence, he insists that this information be recorded in the minutes. Ruprecht admits that he broke down the door, entered the room and saw someone fleeing through the window. He mentions that he was able to hit the fugitive twice on the head with a broken door handle, but was unable to identify the person. Ruprecht admits that he is not sure whether he or the fugitive broke the jug in the chaos that ensued.
When it is Eve's turn, Adam speaks to her again and apparently tries to influence her testimony. Walter admonishes him again. Eve testifies that it wasn't Ruprecht who broke the jug, but that she doesn't want to name the real culprit.
During a break in the negotiations, Adam tries to get Walter drunk. Then Brigitte, a lodger in Marthe's house, arrives with a light and a wig in her hand. She explains that she found the wig in Marthe's garden last night and that she and Licht found a footprint in the fresh snow and both followed it to Adam's house.
Walter asks Adam to come clean, but Adam refuses and instead announces his verdict: Ruprecht is convicted and sent to prison for disobeying the court. Eve now exclaims that it was Adam who was in her room last night and broke the jug as he fled. Adam is attacked by a furious Ruprecht but escapes the courtroom unscathed. Walter assures Ruprecht that his conviction will be overturned, Ruprecht and Eve reconcile and her parents agree to the wedding.
