The Unbearable Lightness of Being
Milan Kundera


"The Unbearable Lightness of Being" by Milan Kundera is a profound novel set against the backdrop of the Prague Spring and its Soviet suppression, taking the reader on a captivating and profound journey through the highs and lows of human existence. The book tells the story of the interwoven lives of the four main characters - Tomás, Tereza, Sabina and Franz - and their search for love, freedom and meaning in a world characterized by political upheaval and moral dilemmas. Kundera's work is philosophically rich and stylistically unique, making it a significant contribution to modern literature.
Summary
Lightness and heaviness
The work begins with the author's own views on the political, philosophical and historical aspects of the concepts of lightness and heaviness. In the context of these reflections, he finally introduces Tomás, a Czechoslovak surgeon living in Prague in the mid-1960s, a divorced man with many lovers who, after meeting Teresa, questions his life as a perpetual bachelor. Tomás finally gives in to the possible "infatuation" he experiences with Teresa and marries, although this does not mean the end of his affairs, of which Sabina, a liberal artist, is the next lover. After the Prague Spring, when the Soviet troops take the Czechoslovak capital, Tomás decides to go to Zurich with Teresa, together with his dog Karenin. Later, Teresa, who had spoken out in favor of leaving Czechoslovakia, decides to return to Prague alone and leave Tomas behind. The story is about lightness and heaviness as two controversial factors that Kundera adds to each couple, factors that will determine the lives and future actions of the novel's characters.
The soul and the body
In the second part, the author refers to the distance between the soul and the body of Teresa, who constantly looks in the mirror and hopes not to find her mother in herself; Teresa feels that her soul does not belong to her body, and tries to make herself indifferent to this body. She does not recognize herself, and the more she sees the resemblance to her mother, the more her soul moves away. She speaks of our lives being bombarded by coincidences; these heighten the sense of the beauty of simple events by making them memorable.
Misunderstood words
After analyzing the relationship between Sabina, Tomas' lover, and Franz, Kundera reveals the complexity of the differences between Sabina and Franz, which are deeply rooted in the meaning they give to things: the marches, the cemetery walks, the woman. Looking back on the two characters' lives, which have determined their view of things, we find great justification for their separation, to the point of necessity for Sabina, who prefers to distance herself from Franz in the face of the possibility of giving her life entirely to what she does not believe in.
The soul and the body
Teresa questions her relationship with Tomás, above all because her husband's infidelity does not stop. She starts working in a bar, serving drinks behind the counter, and meets an engineer who begins to seduce her. Teresa tries to test what it feels like to be unfaithful to Tomás by visiting the engineer and sleeping with him. Later, Teresa begins to suspect that this situation, the engineer and the way she met him is a plot by her country's communist secret service, set up to persecute opponents.
Lightness and heaviness
Tomas writes a review for an intellectual magazine in which he describes the situation of the communists in his country in reference to the Greek tragedy Oedipus Rex, which leads to his persecution and forces him to give up his job as a surgeon in the Prague hospital. Later, as a practicing doctor, he is forced to betray those responsible at the publishing house where his article was published. Tomas refuses and eventually gives up his job as a doctor and becomes a window cleaner. He begins a pilgrimage through Prague, cleaning windows and sleeping with a variety of women to find the difference between them.
The Grand March
After 10 years, Sabina moves to the United States. She lives with an elderly couple who, in a way, embody the unfulfillable and unrealistic desire for a family, because they are like her children. This good time soon comes to an end when the old man dies and his wife goes to Canada to live with their son. Sabina wants to remain in a state of ease, unencumbered and unattached, so she writes a will in which she stipulates that her body is to be cremated and her ashes scattered after her death.
On the other hand, Franz lives with the student with the big glasses, but always under the imaginary eye of Sabina's approval. A friend invites him to take part in the Grand March in Cambodia to protest against the blockade of the international medical community caring for people damaged by the war and the communist occupation. The woman he lives with does not want him to take part, but Franz's desire for Sabina's recognition leads him to attend the event. The march takes place at the Vietnamese border and 400 doctors, photographers, intellectuals and artists take part. They march in single file to avoid the mines and when they reach the border, there is absolute silence and muffled shouts of protest: The doctors cannot cross the border to do their work. On this march, Franz realizes that his adoration for Sabina must come to an end, because the person he loves is the student with the big glasses. At night, a young man comes up to Franz and says something in a language he doesn't understand. When he tries to help him, he is attacked by a couple of young men and is hit hard on the head, knocking him to the ground. When he regains consciousness, he is lying in a hospital in Geneva with Marie Claude (his wife) sitting next to him. Franz did not want to see her, as he wanted his beloved by his side, but he was unable to speak or move, so he closed his eyes and died.
Tomás' son Simon also sought his father's approval or imaginary gaze. When Tomás was cleaning windows, he tried to approach him several times, but his shyness prevented him, the same shyness that made him stutter the day he was asked to sign the amnesty letter for the prisoners. Simon moved to the country, met a girl, married her and devoted himself to religion. When he found out that his father was also living in the camp, he thought that they were finally leading a similar life and that his father would be proud of him.
The smile of Karenin
Once in the country, Tomas and Therese finally find a "peace" that is only interrupted by the letters from Tomas' son and by the cancer of their pet, Karenin. It is Karenin who finally reflects the true nature of Therese's feelings: His death completes a cycle that finally distances the couple from the storms of the past, from the doubts and lack of commitment they once had in Prague.
