Their Eyes Were Watching God
Zora Neale Hurston
*"Their Eyes Were Watching God" by Zora Neale Hurston is a landmark of African American and feminist literature. The novel follows its spirited and independent heroine, Janie Crawford, on her journey from a constrained adolescence to self-realization and fulfillment. Through her relationships with three different men, Janie battles against the suffocating expectations of her community and the domineering attitudes of her husbands in her quest to find not only a man who truly loves her but also her own voice and identity.*

Summary
It is sundown in the small, all-black town of Eatonville, Florida, and people have begun to come out of their houses and clump together on the porch where, every evening, they gather and gossip. This particular evening they see a woman walking in the road toward them; they recognize her immediately as being Janie Starks, a 40-year-old woman who left town in a blue satin dress. She has returned, her long hair hanging loose down her back, and wearing overalls. She speaks briefly to the porch sitters, then continues on until she reaches her gate. One of the women, Pheoby Watson, stands up abruptly and tells the others that she’s Janie’s best friend and that she’s tired of the porch sitters badmouthing Janie. Pheoby intends to take Janie some mulatto rice.
Janie is delighted with the rice and finishes it quickly; then she begins cleaning her feet, readying herself to tell Pheoby about everything that’s happened to her after she left town a year and a half ago.
Janie recalls the time when she was a small child, Janie Crawford, raised by her grandmother, Nanny. She never saw her father and doesn’t recall ever seeing her mother. She played with the four grandchildren of the white woman whom Nanny worked for and was dressed in clothes that they'd outgrown. School kids teased her about living with white folks and taunted her with tales about her father’s cruelty to her mother and about the bloodhounds that were set loose to try to find him. Nanny noticed that the little girl was continually depressed, so she bought them a small house of their own.
Years later, when she was 16, Janie suddenly was aware that a tall, lean boy, whom she’d always referred to as “shiftless Johnny Taylor,” had turned handsome overnight and was desirable. He kissed Janie just once—but Nanny knew and sat bolt-upright from her nap and saw him do it. She knew instantly that it was time for Janie to get married. Nanny was not about to leave the choice of a husband to chance: she’d marry Janie to old Logan Killicks despite Janie’s protests. Janie’s mother’s life was ruined by the wrong kind of men, and Nanny vows that Janie’s life will be different. Killicks can give Janie protection and security, two things that she will need after Nanny dies. Prophetically, Nanny tells her, “[M]ah head is ole and tilted towards de grave.”
After being married in Nanny’s parlor, Janie struggles with the fear that she may never love her husband; she confesses her confusion to her grandmother, who has no easy answers for her. A month later, Nanny is dead.
Logan Killicks changes. He no longer teases and spoils Janie, delighting in fingering her long black hair and talking in rhymes. One day, he announces that he’s going to Lake City to talk to a man about a mule and tells Janie that he wants her to stay home and cut up seed potatoes. Sitting by the road, working at the potatoes, Janie sees a man approaching, well-dressed and whistling. He doesn’t notice Janie, so she runs to the pump and begins jerking the handle to attract the man’s attention.
The seal-brown man introduces himself as Joe Starks, bound for the town that he’s heard about—the one being built by an all-black population. He wants to settle there and be “a big voice.” He compliments Janie on how young she looks and tells her that a “pretty doll-baby” like Janie shouldn’t be left home to cut up seed potatoes. Every day afterward, Janie and Joe manage to find a secret place to talk, where he can tell Janie more about his big dreams. Janie is mesmerized by this good-looking dreamer who says that he wants to marry her and take her to the all-black town. One morning, Janie decides to sneak out and go with Joe, and that morning, he appears with a hired rig. They are married before sundown.
Joe is good to Janie; she calls him Jody. On the train, he spoils her with candies and apples and continues to talk about “the colored town.” He feels that his destiny lies in that town, and that he has a mission to become a leading figure in it. As soon as they get off the train, Joe finds a buggy for them.
What they find at their destination is far from the utopia Joe envisioned. About a dozen small houses stand in a sandy clearing. The bleak little collection of shacks, however, doesn’t daunt Joe’s ambitions. Clearly, all this town needs is him. He is incredulous to hear that the town has no mayor—and even more amazed to discover that no one knows for sure what the name of the town is.
Joe buys land and convinces the townspeople that they need a “heart” in their town, a large store where people can buy what they need, instead of going to another town to buy it. The townspeople have never seen so much energy and enthusiasm as Joe Starks exudes. He’s easily able to organize the people and their axes, chopping away at scrub brush until a recognizable road leads in and out of town. Lots begin to sell, and Janie is busy all day working at the store, even before the roof is hammered on. When the store is finished, the townspeople celebrate. Joe shares cheese and crackers with everyone and Janie pours lemonade. Jody is proclaimed mayor, and Janie is proclaimed Mrs. Mayor Starks.
Joe sets up a Sears, Roebuck street light, people bring armloads of food, and again the town is filled with the songs and sounds of celebration. Afterward, Janie confesses that she feels inadequate; she’s a simple woman, and all this responsibility and power are frightening. Joe Starks, however, is in his element. He commands attention by merely stepping up on a porch.
He builds Janie a big white house, smokes long cigars, and acquires a fascination with expensive spitting pots. Months pass, and it isn’t long before his larger-than-life persona metamorphoses into overbearing, bragging behavior and some of the townspeople begin to resent his swaggering, almighty presence; moreover, he’s begun to be curt and censorious to Janie when she miscalculates while clerking in the store. As for Janie, the author tells us that “the store itself was a pleasant place if only [Janie] didn’t have to sell things.” The little math she knows doesn’t include figuring half pounds or a dime’s worth. Joe, however, insists that Janie work all day in the store—and that she keep her luxuriant hair hidden under a head rag. Her hair belongs to his admiring gazes—and not to anyone else’s, male or female.
One day, when the townspeople tease a poor overworked mule, Janie is furious. She knows all too well that the way men treat a mule is similar to the way they treat their women. She yells to Joe and tells him to cease. Shamed, Joe buys the miserable old mule, sets it free, and it grows fat and becomes a town favorite before it dies and is given a mock-serious funeral, which again rankles Janie’s good sense of what’s right and decent.
Over time, Joe becomes even more oppressive; he wants Janie to feel her submission. For a while, Janie refuses. Then one day, Joe slaps her and her once-ideal husband vanishes; in his stead is a tyrant and a man who enjoys flirting with trashy women. The urge to argue and fight with her husband slowly drains out of Janie. Joe becomes increasingly abusive with her, mentally and physically, and Janie realizes suddenly that he’s become an old man, 17 years older than she. Impulsively, she taunts him about being old. Enough is enough, and Joe strikes Janie with all his strength.
Afterward, Joe sleeps in a room downstairs, licking his wounded vanity. Gradually, he begins keeping to his bed, growing ever weaker. Janie doesn’t spare him: she tells him that he’s going to die, which terrifies him. When Joe does die, the first thing Janie does after he stops breathing is jerk off the head rag he ordered her to wear. She fixes her hair and opens the window, crying out to Eatonville, “Jody is dead. Mah husband is gone from me.”
Joe’s funeral sparkles with the chrome and colored sheen of Cadillacs and Buicks; processions of people attend from hither and yon—poor people on mules and rich ones dressed in golds and reds. Janie “sent her face to Joe’s funeral”; inside she was still celebrating her liberation from a man who’d grown so powerful so quickly that he’d become unbearable. That night she burns up every head rag in the house.
Six months of Janie’s wearing black mourning dresses passes—and not a single man has come to court her—until the day when most of the town has traveled to Winter Park to watch a ball game. She’s alone in her store when a tall man comes in, and she begins admiring his lazy eyes with curling lashes, his lean shoulders, and narrow waist. Playing checkers with him, she rediscovers a laughing, freewheeling sense of fun that has lain buried for years. The man is Vergible Woods—Tea Cake, for short.
A week later, Tea Cake visits the store again and jokes with Janie, sweet-talking her over glasses of lemonade. He kindles her zest for adventure when he coaxes her into going late-night fishing with him at Lake Sabelia. The following night, he brings her a string of fresh-caught trout. Afterward, Tea Cake plays blues on the piano and, before long, he and Janie begin to talk about their affection for one another. Janie points out to him that she’s nearly 12 years older than Tea Cake, a fact that doesn’t matter to Tea Cake. Janie closes up the store late one evening and discovers him sleeping in her hammock; they spend the night in laughter, making love throughout the house.
The neighbors begin to grumble when Tea Cake and Janie become less prudent about their growing intimacy. The town picnic gives everyone a close-up look at Tea Cake, a man certainly younger than Joe Starks, probably penniless, and possessing none of Joe’s confidence or capabilities. Janie, however, believes that she and Tea Cake can be happy together, and she plans to marry him. She married old Logan Killicks to please her grandmother; she married an ambitious, rich man to please herself, but also to please her grandmother—had Nanny lived to see what a successful life Jody had created for them. Joe is dead, however, and now Janie plans to make new choices and live a life that she chooses for herself. Tea Cake has picked her out a blue satin dress, and Janie warns her friend Pheoby that one morning Pheoby will wake up calling—and Janie’ll be gone.
Not many of the Eatonville townspeople see Janie climb aboard an early train to Jacksonville, Florida, but enough of them do and fix their eyes on the blue satin dress that Tea Cake has told her to wear because he plans to “marry her right from the train.” Tea Cake is waiting for her and after they are married, they ride around on the Jacksonville trolley, getting a feel for the city. The next morning, Janie sleeps in while Tea Cake goes out. After breakfast, Janie discovers that the $200 that she pinned inside her pink silk vest is gone. She sits and remembers foolish old Annie Tyler, easily seduced by men much younger, moving to Tampa and returning home broke and shamefaced. Janie vows not to be a carbon copy of Annie. Whatever happens, she’s not going back to Eatonville.
When Tea Cake comes home, he’s got a guitar around his neck and joy in his smile. He took her money—and he had a good time spending it, entertaining his friends. He now knows what it feels like to be rich. Janie tells him that she’ll kill him if he ever takes her money again. She asks him to take her along when he’s leaving to have a good time, and Tea Cake is overjoyed to hear that she wants to meet his friends and become a part of his life—but he intends to do some high-stakes gambling and needs to be alone. He sets out with two decks of cards and a switchblade knife and returns with two cuts on his back, $322, and the news that they’re going to set out for “de muck,” down in the Everglades, to work in fields of stringbeans and tomatoes.
Down at Lake Okechobee, Tea Cake plants beans and teaches Janie how to shoot a pistol, a shotgun, and a rifle. During bean-picking time, people who work the muck gather at night at Tea Cake’s to hear him sing and play his guitar, while they eat themselves full of Janie’s black-eyed peas, rice, navy beans, and hunks of bacon.
When Tea Cake confesses to being unbearably lonely around midday, Janie grabs a basket and joins him in the muck, relieved that this kind of work feels better than “clerkin’ in dat store.” She wonders what the Eatonville folks would think if they could see her now in her overalls and heavy shoes. She is deliciously happy. Every night, the house is full of people, laughing and eating and listening to Tea Cake “pick the box.” Like all things, however, perfect happiness can be short-lived and Janie’s happiness is ambushed one day by a little chunky girl named Nunkie who begins boldly eyeing Tea Cake while he’s working in the fields. Janie catches Tea Cake and Nunkie tussling, and Tea Cake explains that the girl grabbed his work tickets and he was trying to get them back. Later, Janie wallops him and they fight until they both dissolve in kisses and sex on the floor.
The picking season closes, and Tea Cake and Janie decide to stay rather than move back to Jacksonville. Next season, many of the old crowd return, some of them surprised that a “high time woman” like Janie is still willing to work on the muck. Tea Cake boasts that Janie does whatever he wants her to do, and he boasts of his physical control over her.
When Janie is tired after all-night partying, though, Tea Cake is sympathetic and often tells her to stay home from the muck and rest. One afternoon, when she’s at home, she sees a band of Seminoles passing by, laden like burros. They tell her that a hurricane is coming. Rabbits begin scurrying by, possums slink by, and even snakes begin heading inland, toward the Palm Beach road. That night, people gather at Tea Cake’s to talk. The wind starts picking up and everybody decides to go home. By morning, Lake Okechobee is roaring with wrath.
Thunder and lightning crackle in the skies. In the shacks of the muck workers, eyes are keen—questioning and watching God. The wind screams and things begin crashing, as Okechobee pounds against the frail dike that holds its massive, roiling waters.
Tea Cake yells at Janie to get their insurance papers and all their money; they’ve got to try to walk out, locking arms with a friend for support. They step out in hip-deep water, amidst frightening struggling cattle. The water gushes faster as they manage to reach the bridge at Six Mile Bend, already filled with white people. Tea Cake and Janie are swept away in the flood until Tea Cake sees a cow thrashing in the deep water and yells to Janie to grab the cow’s tail. Janie siezes it and holds fast, while Tea Cake reaches the cow and tries to toss off the angry dog that terrorizes them as it crouches astride the cow’s backbone. Tea Cake fails to dislodge the dog, and it bites him high up on his cheek bone. Next day, they trudge into Palm Beach.
Two days later, Tea Cake rouses himself and tells Janie that, somehow, they have to get out of town—maybe go back upstate. Palm Beach is thick with dead and dying bodies, and every time the Red Cross workers see an able-bodied man, they make him help them bury the dead. When Tea Cake ventures out to look around at the crushed houses and smashed trees, he is forced to join other men who are digging a ditch as bodies are pitched into it and covered with quick-lime.
When Tea Cake is able to return to Janie, he says that the safest place for them is probably back in the Everglades. Next day, they are back on the muck, fixing up a house to live in and hailing old friends. About the middle of the fourth week back, Tea Cake awakens with a sick headache and a throat that fights against swallowing. A doctor arrives and predicts that Tea Cake will die a horrible death from the infected dog bite. Tea Cake becomes delirious and Janie checks to see if his pistol is loaded. For good measure, she loads the rifle, as well.
Later, Tea Cake threatens Janie and she realizes that he’s gone mad. She fires at him and watches him crumple as he leaps forward and buries his teeth in her forearm.
After her trial and acquittal, following a plea that her killing Tea Cake was an act of mercy and self-defense, Janie buries his body in a strong vault, with a new guitar, in Palm Beach, far from the fury of future storms. A band plays; it is a glorious funeral. Janie wears overalls to the service.
Back in Eatonville, Janie pauses in her story, and Pheoby breathes heavily, promising to value her husband more than ever and to make him take her fishing; they need to spend more time together. Climbing the stairs with a lamp, Janie knows for sure that Tea Cake will never really be dead—not really dead—until she herself has finished feeling and thinking about him.