To the Lighthouse
Virginia Woolf


"To the Lighthouse" by Virginia Woolf is considered one of her most outstanding works and a masterpiece of literary modernism. The novel is set in the years before and after the First World War and follows the members of the Ramsay family and several of their friends during their visits to a vacation home in Scotland. The longed-for but initially postponed visit to the lighthouse becomes the central metaphor of the novel, which addresses the transience of time, the complexity of human relationships and the search for meaning and continuity in a changing universe.
Summary
Part I: The Window
The story unfolds in the Ramsays' summer house on the Isle of Skye in the Hebrides. In the novel’s opening section, Mrs. Ramsay assures her son James that they will visit the lighthouse the next day, an undertaking that is immediately rejected by Mr. Ramsay as the weather would put a spanner in the works. This leads to a noticeable tension both between Mr. and Mrs. Ramsay and between father and son, a theme that is revisited throughout this section, especially in the context of the Ramsays' marriage.
The Ramsays' home is filled with friends and colleagues, including Lily Briscoe, a young and insecure painter who attempts to create a portrait of Mrs. Ramsay and James during the plot. Her insecurity is reinforced by Charles Tansley, a guest who repeatedly claims that women can neither paint nor write. Tansley is also an admirer of Mr. Ramsay, a philosophy professor, and his academic works.
The section ends with a dinner party that is disrupted by two events: First, Mr. Ramsay nearly threatens to slap Augustus Carmichael, a poet among the guests, when he asks for more soup; second, Mrs. Ramsay becomes upset when two of her matchmaking acquaintances, Paul Rayley and Minta Doyle, arrive late for dinner because Minta has lost her grandmother's brooch on the beach.
Part II: Time Passes
In the second section, the reader is confronted with the passage of time, loneliness and death. A period of ten years passes, during which the First World War breaks out and ends again. The tragic losses of Mrs. Ramsay and two of her children - Prue from childbirth complications and Andrew in the war - characterize this phase. Mr. Ramsay is left behind, without the comforting words of his wife, while his concern for his philosophical work grows. The events are told from an omniscient perspective, sometimes from the point of view of Mrs. McNab, who has worked in the Ramsay home since the beginning. Mrs. McNab offers a clear insight into the changes that have taken place during the time the summer house has been empty.
Part III: The Lighthouse
In the novel's final section, members of the Ramsay family and some guests revisit their holiday location ten years after the occurrences detailed in the first part. The long-delayed trip to the lighthouse is finally undertaken by Mr. Ramsay with his children Camilla (Cam) and James, while the other Ramsay children remain in the background. Despite initial resistance from the children, the trip goes ahead. During the boat trip, the tension between the children, who participate with reluctance, and their father evaporates. Surprisingly, James hears praise from his father instead of the expected harshness, showing a rare empathic connection between them; and Cam's attitude towards his father changes from resentment to appreciation.
They are joined by the sailor Macalister and his son, who fishes during the journey. He cuts a piece out of a still-living fish to use as bait and throws the rest of the fish back into the sea. Virginia Woolf uses this image as a metaphor for the world as a cruel, merciless environment in which survival is a challenge.
At the same time, Lily strives to complete a painting that she has carried with her since the beginning of the story. She reflects on Mrs. and Mr. Ramsay and their many experiences to arrive at an understandable truth about Mrs. Ramsay and life in general. The completion of the painting, which coincides with the arrival of the sailors at the lighthouse, brings Lily satisfaction and the realization that fulfilling her artistic vision is more significant than leaving a lasting legacy with her creation.
