Walden
Henry David Thoreau
*"Walden" by Henry David Thoreau is a seminal work of American literature and a classic of autobiographical narrative. It recounts the author's experiment in simple, self-sufficient living over two years and two months in a cabin he built himself by Walden Pond in Massachusetts. More than just a record of his time in nature, the book is a profound exploration of transcendentalist philosophy, a critique of industrial society, and a guide to spiritual awakening. Thoreau sought to prove that a life of simplicity, individualism, and introspection, lived in harmony with nature, was not only possible but essential for discovering one's true self and living a meaningful life, urging readers to escape their own "lives of quiet desperation."*
Summary
For two years and two months, beginning on July 4, 1845, Henry David Thoreau lived alone in the woods at Concord, Massachusetts, in a house he built on the shores of Walden Pond. He earned his living "by the labor of [his] hands only" and explains that he wrote Walden to answer questions about his life in nature and to awaken his "sleeping" neighbors to the true meaning of life. Having returned to "civilized life," he offers a simple, sincere account of his experience, hoping others will reassess their own lives. In order to give structure to the narrative, he compresses the story of his two years into a single calendar year, tracking his growth through the cycle of the seasons.

Thoreau claims that most people are devoted to the false idea that they must punish themselves with constant work, causing them to fail to enjoy life. He asserts that these citizens are worse off than slaves, for they are their own slave drivers, leading "lives of quiet desperation." Believing change is an exciting "miracle to contemplate," Thoreau critically examines society's values, especially the high price placed on property. To avoid being "crushed and smothered" by possessions, he reduces his belongings to the bare necessities: food, shelter, clothing, and fuel. His goal is not to live cheaply or dearly, but to live with the fewest obstacles possible. He describes the economic details of his experiment, noting his house cost only $28.12½ to build. By living simply, he only needed to work for about six weeks a year to afford his lifestyle.

Earlier in his life, Thoreau had considered buying a farm but realized that owning land would enslave him. He believed he could derive the same benefits by simply living on the land without owning it. He describes the joy he felt after moving to Walden; each morning, he bathed in the pond as a religious exercise that filled him with a zest for life. He urges his neighbors to pursue the reality hidden beneath tradition and appearance and to rely on their natural instincts. He also champions serious reading as the best form of mental exercise, one that requires the reader to laboriously seek the meaning of each line.

There is pleasure in experiencing the sounds of nature, a symphony that is interrupted by the rattle of the railroad, a symbol of encroaching commerce and the destruction of nature. While he meditates on the benefits of the train, he becomes more annoyed by its intrusion, and his tranquility is only restored when it passes. Thoreau contrasts his fondness for solitude with his experience with visitors. He finds it "wholesome to be alone the greater part of the time," but also enjoys quality conversations, telling of his particular pleasure in the company of a Canadian wood chopper whose simplicity he admires.

Thoreau discusses his bean-field, the rows of which added up to seven miles. He is determined to know all he can about beans and the rewards of careful cultivation, stressing the importance of planting the seeds of sincerity, truth, and faith in a new generation of people. His work in the field also symbolizes the process of writing, a difficult labor of making painful distinctions, leveling some ideas and diligently cultivating others.

In his daily visits to the village, he observes that the centers of gossip are the grocery store, bar, and post office. During his first summer, Thoreau is jailed for a night for refusing to pay a tax to a state that supports slavery. Upon his return to the woods, he reflects that he was never "molested by any person but those who represented the State." The only possession ever stolen from his unlocked cabin was his copy of Homer.

He gives an extended description of Walden Pond, emphasizing its purity. The Pond is a symbol of self-discovery; bathing in it is part of his spiritual and physical purification. It is "the earth's eye, looking into which the beholder measures the depth of his own nature." One night while fishing, he feels a faint jerk on his line that links him to Nature and the Ideal, catching "two fishes, as it were, with one hook." He also visits John Field and his family on Baker Farm, who lead a dreary life and are unwilling to heed his advice on economy and simplicity. While walking home one night, he spots a woodchuck and is tempted to devour it raw, leading him to consider the tension between his "savage" animal instincts and his higher spiritual aspirations. He praises purity and condemns sensuality, describing the many "brute neighbors" near his cabin, including mice, otters, and a warring army of red and black ants.

As autumn arrives, Thoreau prepares his house for the cold, taking pride in the construction of his chimney. In winter, he lives as "snug as a meadow mouse" by his fire. To keep his mind busy, he observes the frozen pond and the winter animals. He watches ice-men extracting ice from Walden, taking pleasure in the thought that the pure waters of the pond might be drunk by inhabitants in faraway hot climates.

As spring arrives, the Pond melts and the sun grows stronger. Thoreau is ecstatic about the rebirth of nature, for in a beautiful spring morning, "all men's sins are forgiven." In his conclusion, he summarizes what he has learned, explaining that "if one advances confidently in the direction of his dreams... he will meet with a success unexpected in common hours." He advises that one need not conform to society's expectations: "if a man does not keep pace with his companions, perhaps it is because he hears a different drummer. Let him step to the music which he hears, however measured or far away." His final words of advice are "Love your life."