We
Yevgeny Zamyatin


"We" by Yevgeny Zamyatin is a groundbreaking dystopian novel that is often seen as a precursor and inspiration for later works such as George Orwell's "1984" and Aldous Huxley's "Brave New World". It was the first book ever to be officially banned in the Soviet Union. The novel is set in a totalitarian state of the future called the One State, where citizens are known as numbers and any form of individuality and privacy is forbidden. The narrator, D-503, is the lead designer of the spaceship "Integral", but begins to question his loyalty to the state after falling in love with the mysterious I-330.
Summary
In a future where the One State rules the entire world, the spaceship "Integral" is constructed to subjugate alien worlds. D-503, the lead engineer on the project, decides to keep a diary of his time on the spaceship.
D-503, like all other citizens, lives in a glass house and is under constant surveillance by the secret police. His lover, O-90, who has been chosen by the state to visit him on set nights, is too short to have children, which makes her deeply unhappy. Her other lover and D-503's boyfriend is R-13, a state poet who recites poetry at executions.
During a walk with O-90, D-503 meets a woman named I-330, who behaves in a completely unconventional manner, smoking, drinking and flirting with D-503 instead of seeking impersonal sexual encounters - all acts that are strictly forbidden in the One State.
D-503 is simultaneously repulsed and attracted and struggles with his attraction to I-330. She takes him to the "Ancient House", the only building in the state which is opaque. Historical and aesthetic objects are kept here. I-330 offers him the help of a corrupt doctor to justify his absence from work. Although D-503 leaves the city in horror and swears to betray I-330 to the secret police, he finds himself unable to do so.
D-503 is plagued by dreams that disturb him, as in his society dreaming is considered a sign of mental illness. Over time, I-330 reveals to him her connection to the Mephi, a rebellious group intent on overthrowing the One State. She guides him through secret corridors in the Ancient House to the area outside the Green Wall that encircles the State, where he encounters individuals clad in animal skins. The Mephi aim to demolish the Green Wall to reconnect the citizens with the external world.
O-90, though recently estranged from D-503, asks him to illegally impregnate her. D-503 agrees after O-90 assures her that she will give the child to the state, but as the pregnancy progresses, she realizes that she cannot give up her baby. At D-503's request, I-330 organizes for O-90 to be taken to safety outside the Green Wall.
In his last diary entry, D-503 emotionlessly describes how he was tied to a table and subjected to the "Great Operation" that recently became mandatory for all citizens. This operation, in which parts of the brain are treated with X-rays, suppresses imagination and emotion in order to prevent unrest. After the operation, D-503 willingly reveals the secrets of the Mephi, but is astonished that I-330 does not reveal any information even under torture. As a result, she is sentenced to death.
Meanwhile, the Mephi uprising gathers pace: Parts of the Green Wall are destroyed, birds fly into the city, and a rebellion breaks out. Although D-503 hopes for a return to "sanity", the novel ends with the uncertain future of the One State. I-330's compelling thought remains: Just as there is no greatest number, there is no final revolution.
